7, 3, 5.
Will Hall please come to order.
There is a quorum welcome, residents
and taxpayers town officials, town meeting members,
and interested parties to the third session
of 2024 fall annual town meeting.
Are there any town meeting members that need
to be sworn in at this time?
Seeing none, would you all please rise for the pledge
of allegiance and a moment of silence, particularly
with those in mind serving around the globe on our behalf,
I pledge allegiance to the flag
Of the United States of America
and to the republic, which are one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
Thank you. The meeting is
assembled as follows, to my right as Diane Packer,
town clerk designee for the purpose
of following old town meeting seated immediately
to my left is Grace Ney Finance Committee,
vice chair sitting in for the secretary.
Next to Ms.
Ney is Todd Gillum, water Finance Committee chair.
And seated next to Todd is Carris North Town Council.
Down on the well furthest from me is Catherine Coughlin,
chair of the select board.
And seated next to the chair
is Jamie Erickson, town Administrator.
Please remember, clear liquids only
permitted in the hall room.
No other drink is permitted
and absolutely no food is permitted in the hall.
Cell phones and iPads at the, at a minimum please mute them.
If not, turn them off please.
And you all have your lanyards with your voting device on
make certain that you're,
you're getting a a showing a battery is on.
And we will do a, we don't have a test vote, we'll do,
we'll do a procedural motion in a moment, which we'll use
as a test vote.
Please remember that the center section forward
and the center, the right hand section on the forward
of the auditorium is strictly reserved
for town meeting members.
Town meetings, members may sit otherwise in the hall,
but when I do a hand count,
I'm gonna look at these two sections first
and then if I need, feel as though I need
to count all the o any other hands in the hall,
I will then I go to the other, the outer regions of the hall
to, on the right hand side we reserve that for
spec speakers, special interest people
with regards to an article, town, department,
department, heads or otherwise.
There are two individuals down front
who manage the overhead screen
and they may sit, sit in the area of the town,
meeting member's seats.
All other people can sit in the,
the outer regions and everybody's welcome.
You do want to keep the hallways clear so
that people can pass freely.
We had a set bunch of rules.
I'm not gonna read them, but we,
we did accept them under the first meeting
and we will continue with those rules
as they have been accepted.
I do wanna propose the following procedural motion.
And that's I think slide number four on the PowerPoint.
Ah, she's got it. Move that Article 29.
Be heard immediately after Article 26.
That's moved by Mr. Greer, seconded by Mr. Ostroff.
All those in favor, please raise your hands.
All those opposed that passes by hand count
A couple of announcements or at least one
you may not know, but we're gonna vote on November 5th.
But as we're voting, the Natick Service Council is going
to have a, an election day food drive
and they will be, let's see, bring
non-perishable food donations
to your polling station on election day.
All donations will benefit the,
the Natick Service Council food pantry.
And in their notes that they sent to me, I was amazed at
they used the number of 350 families
or regularly use the pantry and it's, it's a great cause.
So when I know you all go down to vote,
even though you voted early, maybe you could go to the,
the voting places and drop off some food.
I You can have a box at town hall. Oh, there is one now.
Okay, so town hall has, has a drop off place also,
you, I'm sure you've received my emails,
the two of them for this session.
There was a revised when I sent out, I think it was Saturday
and it lined
or outlined that we would start with article one.
Then we'll move to articles 26, then 29 as you just voted,
27, 28 onto 30, 32, 31 and 20.
So with that we're gonna start,
why don't we do a test vote since we didn't do the the
electronic vote, just so that we don't get into something
and don't have to show it.
What were we we going to do?
Did you like your, did you like your, your summer?
Did you enjoy your summer? One for yes, two for no.
Did you enjoy your summer?
Please register your vote now
and we'll use that as a test vote.
Voting is closed. The tally is vote
86.
Yes, nine. Still want and not be here.
And 50 and abstain smart people.
Why don't just scroll through it Jeff
so people can see their votes.
Excellent. Everybody here and accounted for saw their votes.
Everybody happy? Most excellent.
We'll move on to the first order of business,
which is article one, which we call a committee article.
Basically to hear reports from town
officers, boards and committees.
Ms. Keeny, does a finance committee have a recommendation
under article one?
Mr. Moderator town meeting members the finance committee
uni unanimously recommends favorable action on the subject
matter of article one as seen on page 22
of the finance committee recommendation book and I so move
Second.
It's moved by Ms. Keeney, second by Mr. Gillenwater.
The motion head appears on page 22. Debate on the motion.
Seeing none will vote this at this time.
This is the net zero report.
Please vote on the matter now. I'm sorry,
Which report?
Yep,
Discuss right.
I'm sorry, I'm just,
Can I
Just to hear right Talia of the vote please.
94. Yes. Six.
No, zero abstain.
You will now hear a vote from the net zero committee
or a report from the net zero
committee lintel Ms.
Lintel chair Lentel, is that correct?
Yes, that's correct. Very good, thank you.
You have the floor, how
long do you think you're gonna take?
10 minutes.
10 minutes? Yeah.
Okay, we'll hold you
to 10 minutes providing we have a five minute rule
but as long as there's no objection,
10 minutes will be allotted to the speaker.
You have the floor. Great.
Thank you Mr. Moderator
and good evening to town meeting members.
I'm happy to hear that most of you all had a good summer.
My name is Anne Lentel, I currently serve as chair
of the net zero committee.
So I'm here to report under article one the committee
article which the purpose of my presentation is basically
to keep you all informed of the work of the committee.
There's a lot to cover with our committee.
We touch a lot of areas so there were a lot
of ways we could have done this presentation,
but for today my goal is to make sure that at the end
of my remarks, each of you will be able
to answer the following three questions.
Number one, why does this committee exist?
Number two, what is this committee supposed to be doing?
And number three, what is my role?
Meaning your role in ensuring the work
of this committee is successful.
Next slide please. So first of all, what is net zero?
I'm not gonna assume that that's a term
that everyone is familiar with.
So net zero means the amount
of greenhouse gas emissions produced is equal
to the amount removed or diverted from the atmosphere.
So the net effect is zero.
So right now, like you can see in the top image,
we aff emit far more than we absorb or divert.
So we need to do two things at the same time.
First, we need to shrink our greenhouse gas emissions.
So those are the blue boxes, things like burning gas
and oil in our homes
and buildings, driving gas powered cars and so forth.
And second we need to increase activity in the green boxes.
So that's things like zero emission transportation,
utilizing renewable energy resources and so on.
The new the net zero goal is not new for us.
Six years ago the Natick fall town meeting adopted it via a
non-binding resolution
and four years ago Massachusetts set a 2050 net
zero emissions limit.
Next slide please. So with this goal established,
the next step was to come up with a plan.
So the town undertook an extensive planning process
that incorporated numerous stakeholders in the community,
including residents, town staff, elected
and appointed officials, as well
as experts in sustainability and clean energy.
This plan was unanimously endorsed
by all major elected boards in 2021.
And that plan, which is on the town website, I encourage you
to take a look at it articulates 21 action items
to take in the medium term
to ensure Natick reaches that goal.
Next slide please. So
to make sure this work gets done,
the select board appointed a new committee,
the net zero committee, and here we are.
We were appointed late last fall
and had our first meeting in January of this year.
So we're still a very new committee.
Our members have an interesting mix
of professional expertise including architecture, economics,
commercial and residential, energy efficiency, engineering
and consulting, healthcare, technology and finance.
We also have a student representative as well
as a school committee member currently filled
by Kate Lathers.
Next slide please. So let's talk about what's in this plan
Again, it's on the town website.
Under the sustainability department page,
generally the plan is designed
to create solutions in the three big categories
where we emit the most greenhouse gases
and those are our energy sources,
buildings and transportation.
So nested under those there are six core
areas where we're focused.
So everything we're gonna do is really gonna be focused in
these particular domains.
Next slide please. So as I mentioned,
we are a new committee
but so far this year there's a lot of good news to share.
So first, the specialized code which supports future
electrification of new construction was passed
in spring town meeting.
So many of you were here when we presented on that.
And as a reminder that goes into effect
for permits pulled July 1st, 2025.
Second, a $2 million grant for electrification
of Behe was awarded last year
and we've started to procure the work.
The project will focus on replacing building control
and old air handling units as well as adding a heat pump
that can supplement heating needs and also provide cooling.
More recently, the lack
of air conditioning at Behe has been problematic
for staff and students.
And third, the select board recently passed a zero emissions
vehicle first policy, which provides a framework
for electrifying our municipal fleet over time
and we're excited to see this take shape already.
So we'll have six EVs by the end of June in the fleet,
including three SUVs,
two Ford F-150 lightning trucks
and one utility van for staff
who work in administration facilities
and our water division.
And that was not only a good climate decision
but a good financial decision as well given the grant
and government incentives we were able to utilize for that.
Next slide please. So while we're proud of Natick
for these achievements, the reality is there's far more work
to be done in the plan of the 21 steps articulated in the
plan that we are charged with overseeing.
Two thirds are still not done. Next slide please.
So this is the nitty gritty of the plan
and the specific 21 action steps.
So here's how to read this slide starting left to right.
So these tasks are grouped again into the three
buckets I touched on earlier.
So broadly our energy sources,
our buildings and our transportation.
The green, yellow, red dots indicate our progress
with green being significant progress,
yellow being some progress and red being no progress.
And then on the right hand side you can see how each
of these action items maps to the corresponding six domains
and as you can see many of them overlap.
So this is a highly integrated plan
and this is what we're gonna be working on in
the coming months and years.
Next slide please. But mostly I wanna draw your attention
to our more immediate to-do list, which is
to ensure Natick maintains eligibility for grant funding.
Natick is a leader in sustainability statewide
and if you haven't seen it,
the Boston Globe recently ran a feature article on our town
sustainability director, Ms.
Gillian Wilson Martin
for her leadership in accessing grant funding
and climate programming for our town.
Previously Massachusetts had a designation called green
communities, which you can see on the left hand side for
that criteria we've been able
to access over $2 million in funding through that program,
but it is sun setting
and our funding opportunities there are
basically tapped out.
The state has a new criteria which you can see on the right
hand side called climate leaders
that will open up new pathways for funding.
We're in good shape here to be eligible,
but our last big step
before we can apply is the middle criteria, which is
to create the municipal decarbonization roadmap with 2030
and 2050 goals.
We'll present this roadmap
to the select board on November 13th
and then to the school committee later this fall.
We want Natick to be a founding member
of this program like we were a founding member
of green communities.
So our goal is to apply by December 31st. Next slide please.
So going back to the three questions from the beginning
by now you know why the net zero committee exists
and what it is that we're working on.
So let me end by answering what you can do
to ensure our work is successful over the last few months.
As I have reflected on it in some ways I think this
committee is pretty straightforward.
We have a to-do list, we've got a plan
and the town is counting on us
to make sure we see it through.
So that's what we're gonna do.
But in other ways I think our committee has a pretty tough
assignment, which is to compel the people of our town
to do our part, to stop manmade global
warming and to get there.
It's not just gonna be this committee
or the town sustainability team as fabulous as they are,
sustainability is such a wide ranging issue
that touches virtually every aspect of our lives.
It's gonna take all of us.
So here's what you can do as town meeting members.
As you vote on the operating budget
and capital plan, I ask you to keep this net zero goal front
and center in your decision making and your vote.
These decisions sometimes have long tails.
The example I gave earlier about the new EVs for the town
that could have been gas powered vehicles which would've
stayed on the road for another, you know, 5, 10, 15 years
and we would've missed our chance.
And opportunities like
that can create real setbacks in this plan
that compound over time.
So each and every decision we make like that is a chance
to ensure that Natick succeeds,
including on votes you may be taking later this evening.
Second, even though this presentation is here only we want
and need to hear from you.
So if you serve on other town committees
or maybe you volunteer in other capacities in the town,
please reach out to the net zero committee.
If you need support thinking through how
to establish climate priorities in your work,
come to our meetings.
Our meetings are typically on the second
Wednesday of each month.
Agendas are posted publicly.
And lastly, if you're not already, please subscribe
to the Town's sustainability newsletter.
It's chockfull of information updates on
what the committee is working on, new programming
resources available in our area, upcoming events,
community engagement opportunities.
It's really a great resource
and you can find a link to subscribe on the town
sustainability website.
So let's do this, let's work together and let's get it done.
Thank you for your time this evening.
Very good. You've heard the report Mr. Evans, for
what purpose do you seek the floor?
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Town meeting members, I seek the floor to move to
hear the select boards report on P-F-M-L-A
or paid Family Medical leave Act
Second by Mr.
Sidney
to speak to the report.
To give the report. Mr. Sidney, oh we need to vote on this.
Yeah, first I'll get it right one of these days.
Seeing no one to debate to
we will vote to hear the report.
Jeff,
please vote on whether you want to hear the report or not.
Voting is closed.
The vote is 98. Yes. 13.
No, zero abstain. We'll now hear a report.
You have five minutes Mr. Sidney. Thank you Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members.
My name is Richard Sidney,
I'm a town meeting member from Precinct eight
and the clerk of your select board,
I'm not gonna read the report to you
as copies are out on the table if you wanna read the whole
thing, but I will give you some of the highlights.
Spring 2024 town meeting referred Article 28
to the select board among others
and based on that we did a gap on gap analysis of
what our employees can get compared to
the paid Family Medical Leave Act.
What we found is all employees in town are covered
by a sick leave benefit.
It can be used for parental and family medical leave.
Sick pay covers the full earnings of the employees
P-F-M-L-A does not.
Some collective bargaining units also accrue personal leave,
which is full pay and also can be used for this purpose.
One of the things we discovered was
that per act doesn't consider paid family medical leave
under the P-F-M-L-A to be
creditable service, which means that the time taken
for P-F-M-L-A as opposed to sick time, which
does is creditable service
wouldn't help their pension situation.
Which is one of the reasons we feel
that collective bargaining units may
or may not want to
adopt P-F-M-L-A.
We also believe, and
and we've seen this, we saw some of the analysis earlier
at our last town meeting,
but we believe that should the town pass P-F-M-L-A,
the impact bargaining would force us to give back
to the union unions about as much
as they were having withheld from their pay
or we would have to pay that money anyway directly
and that would lead to approximately as
of 2023 a million dollars in additional shared
service costs to the town, which
we struggle to find.
So based on all of this,
select board does not currently support adoption
of P-F-M-L-A
and we in the town administrator are continuing to look
for ways to support our employees' needs.
I will add one thing that I, I meant to highlight.
The city of Worcester is actually adopted a plan
to supply similar benefits to their employees,
which they're fully funding.
We don't know much about that plan
but that kind of thing is is one
of our options going forward.
So thank you very much. Thank you Mr. Sidney.
Member Goeth for what purpose?
You seek the floor behind the rail in the
rear thank you page.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
I move that the town here,
the school committee's report on P-F-M-L-A paid
Family Medical leave Act
Second.
Second by Mr.
Sidney debate on the matter.
We'll vote on the MA that hearing the report at this point
please vote on whether you want to hear the report or not.
Voting is closed.
The vote is 87, yes,
20 0 0 abstain.
And to provide the
report the school committee.
Yes.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Good evening time meeting members.
My name is Catherine Bruell.
I am in precinct nine and a member of the school committee.
It's wonderful to be here with you all.
Thank you so much for the time
and the dedication that you have put in here.
Many of you for years, decades even,
it's truly a service to our town.
You last spring referred article 28 to the school committee
and to other boards and for that we thank you
because it allowed us to do a deep dive into that process
and at this time we do not recommend that you
adopt paid family medical leave for the town of Natick.
That is something that only this body can do.
So we do respect your ability to make that decision.
But as a school committee who has looked into it,
actually I see students here with us.
Nice to see you guys in the back as a school committee
that's looking at the employee's needs
and the student in context of the student's education.
We do not recommend that I am gonna read just one part
of our conclusion to you in just a second
and this memo is also available to you at our supplement,
this at your supplemental table.
And I do encourage you to take the full memo.
We presented this memo to the school committee
Julie McDonough and I did on August 7th of this this summer.
The three reasons mainly are one
because of contract negotiations,
much like the town just shared, we are,
it would in it would then involve another round
of negotiations with our contracts.
We are now in negotiations with our teachers
and so we would like that to come up if anything
movement happens in paid family medical leave in that area,
we would like that to come organically from our teachers
based on their needs and on what they bring to us.
The school has a wonderful process
for many years called interest-based bargaining
that is a solution-based problem solving method that we use
with teachers, administrators,
and school committee where everyone puts their heads
together, they look at the problem
and they come up with the best solutions based on
in within the context of student needs.
So that's where we would like to solve that problem
where it's a come up.
Additionally, there is a unique quality
of the school sector, so things again back
to our negotiations that have been
developed over years including our sick, our sick bank
or detailed leave charts,
things like school breaks and summer breaks.
Those are things that the state,
when the state program was developed for all state
and private employees are not typical to school.
The school sector. And then finally the uncertain
financial impact.
Again like Mr.
Sidney just shared, it does involve an employee contribution
and an employer contribution and that has to be negotiated
and so you don't know where that is gonna land
within the contracts.
In addition to that, the state sets the rate
and in FY 20
that rate was the total contribution was
the employer contribution was 0.372.
By FY 25 it was 0.420.
So I know we're talking about tens,
you know we're talking about decimal points
but that is all controlled at the state.
That's nothing that the town has any control of.
And so just to keep things simple, we would like
to have the most localized solution
within our contract negotiations within our teachers in
the Natick school system.
The final thing I'll read to you is as a school,
as school committee members, we know that parental leave
and family leave is critical to the health
and wellbeing of our Natick public school district Employees
ensuring that our employees can take care of themselves
and their loved ones in critical situations is worthy
of our attention and problem solving.
However, we do not feel that the state program will allow us
to work best within our union employees
and our non-represented staff to solve for
what they most need
and critically within the context of our student needs.
At this point we do not believe
that the state program takes into account the unique
features of a school district,
nor provides the confidence in the cost projections
on which we can rely.
We value the flexibility that we have to respond
to the needs of our employees
through the interest based bargaining
and local options, while at the same time ensuring
that our students who are with us for only 180 days
of the year have highly qualified educators in the
classroom every day with them.
We look forward to working with our union partners,
our non-represented employees, to craft solutions
that are meaningful, responsive
and responsible for our employees and our town.
So thank you for hearing me
and there's lots of copies of this memo
for each one of you to take.
So have a wonderful night
and again thank you for being town meeting members.
Mr. Ooff, are you gonna move something at this time? Yes.
Mr. Moderat
Need a microphone.
Josh Ostroff precinct six. Mr.
Moderator, I move that tamini here
and discuss the report of the charter
and bylaw review committee
Second by Mr. Evans.
There is debate on it before we vote.
Yes Mr. Moderator,
It's only whether you want to hear
or not not the substance of the of of any report.
Of course. Thank you
Mr.
Moderator Through you to town meeting members the
CBRC filed a article to hear a report
and this is simply an opportunity
for members should they choose to discuss said report.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Further debate on only to hear
and discuss the report.
Mr. Lenahan I you know I'm saying that for a reason.
Thank you. Absolutely because
I'm gonna hold you to it.
A question to you sir, that's just a question.
Article
26, the first line says the purpose
of the article to hear the report of the charter
bylaw review committee period that it says some other stuff.
How is this different than just going to write
to 26 adhering the report
That says question to you that says to hear under 26?
Yes
Sir. The motion is to hear and discuss.
Okay, thank you.
That's the difference.
I'm gonna repeat it once again.
This is only on the question to hear
and discuss the report.
Mr. Greer.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Paul Greer, precinct seven member
and chairperson of the charter and bylaw review committee.
I would actually ask you to vote this motion
Down.
One of the things that we have coming up in Article 26 is
simply to hear our report which is very brief.
It doesn't get into a lot of substance.
It's a highlight of the motions
that we will be introducing under articles 26, 27, 28
and 29 so that the substance
of those motions can be discussed under 26, 27, 28 and 29.
We were careful as a committee we actually debated here
and discuss versus here
and we sought the article to be under 26 to just be here
and not to hear and discuss.
The reason was the interest of time.
We took a note of the town seal committee
and it's here and discussed the report
of the town Seal committee.
They went on for two hours
while we then discussed the motion on the
seal for two hours.
In the interest of town meeting
and hopefully trying to finish this evening, I would ask
that we just hear our report under 26
and save all of our discussion which we can have ample
opportunity for people to debate it.
We actually get into the substance of the only things
that we're proposing this fall.
I urge you to vote no thank you.
Seeing no further discussion. The motion is to the floor.
The motion is to hear and discuss the CBRC report.
Jeff
please vote now.
Voting is closed.
Tally is 19, yes. 91 0 3 abstain.
We move on to the next order of business
which is Article 26.
You'll find that on page one 60 of your finance committee.
Recommendation books.
Ms. Ney does a finance committee have a recommendation
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members?
The finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
action on the subject matter of Article 26.
Motion A as seen on page
160 and I so move
Second.
Moved by Ms. Keeney. Second by Mr.
Gillenwater the motion motion A is appears on the bottom
of page one 60.
We will vote this at this time.
Don't see anybody seeking the floor.
We'll bring up the vote for motion. A Jeff
your votes will be counted now.
Voting's closed tally The vote
is 96.
Yes. 12.
No one abstain
to to give the report.
Ms. Weisman you need more than
five minutes to give the report.
No. Thank you Mr. Moderator,
You have the floor.
Thank you Mr. Moderator. Christine Wyman, precinct five.
Secretary of the Charter and bylaw review committee.
Thank you Tom Meeting for your time this evening.
I do plan to be brief.
Our committee would first like to express our gratitude
to both town administration
and Pegasus Town administration enabled Zoom meetings
and Pegasus made our meeting recordings available to demand
for the public and this set up, this set us up to provide,
have greater flexibility in scheduling our meetings without
the need to reserve a physical meeting room
on September 19th, the CBRC held a public hearing
with the finance committee to discuss all our motions.
Excuse me. We received unanimous support for all
but two motions and those motions received 7 1 0
and 7 0 1 votes.
However, these votes do not meet the required eight vote
threshold for a finance committee recommendation.
So we will be presenting those two motions in Article
27 as main motions.
The select board did not take any votes on any
of the CBRC articles in motions.
I won't go over the details
that are already included in our written report which was
emailed to you last week,
but we it does also reference past town meeting actions
especially related to the special act for any of those
that are New Town meeting members.
This past spring and summer our work focused on reviewing
and proposing revisions to the town's bylaws as well
as addressing town meeting issues related
to the Special act legislation.
It's important to note that our review
of the bylaws is still ongoing.
We haven't yet met with all de departments
to determine if their bylaws need updating.
Therefore, we are requesting an extension of our term
until the end of town meeting in fall 2025
in Article 26.
Motion B, if we complete our work by the end
of spring 2025 annual town meeting, we will seek
to dissolve the committee earlier.
We do have an unusual request in Article 26 Motion c
Harriet Berkowitz, a highly experienced town meeting member
and a former member of past CBRC committees as well
as most recently our committee has moved out of town
but she's agreed to continue
to assist the committee on bylaw issues if our
meetings remain on Zoom.
Allowing Ms. Markowitz to work with us
as detailed in a report requires supporting motion C Given
that the original motion
to establish the committee at 2022 fall annual TOM Meeting
Limited membership to Natick residents,
I'll just briefly speak to each motion.
I will speak to each motion in articles 27 28
and 29 so I'm not gonna spend a lot of time here briefly.
Article 27 looks at a variety of different bylaws,
some motions that were initially proposed
during the 2023 fall town meeting
and referred back to US bylaws
for the town clerk in additions to the bylaws
for the Board of Registrars.
Article 28 includes motions requested
by the police chief related to updating those
who can represent being a police officer
or police off police chief designee, excuse me.
And then sections of the animal control bylaws
in Article 29 presents an opportunity for town meeting
to consider changes to the Special Act legislation.
We appreciated the collab,
the collaboration from the police chief, the fire chief,
the interim town clerk, the town moderator
and town administrator who met with CBRC members to discuss
possible bylaw adjustments, some
of which are before you this evening.
The fire chief was satisfied with the current bylaws
and didn't wish to propose any changes regarding the status
of the special act.
The goal of the CBRC
and we hope to town is
to file the actions from the three town meetings
fall 2023 annual town meeting,
special town meeting number one in 2024
and any actions from fall this fall town
meeting after this meeting.
Completing this process requires the minutes
and vote certifications for all three minutes meetings
to be finalized and certified by a town clerk.
We have been communication
with the town administration over the spring
and summer to ensure that these are finalized in time
to file the legislation by the end of 2024.
In our written report we have detailed expenditures from our
special council appropriation
and confirm we have sufficient funds
to continue our bylaw work.
We are pleased to have special counsel Dures here this
evening in the event we need to ask his opinions on any
of the questions that you may ask of us.
Look forward to our conversations
regarding the remaining articles.
Thank you.
Thank you Ms. Keeny.
Further recommendation under Article 26,
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
favorable action on the subject matter of Article 26.
Motion B as seen on page one 60 in the finance committee
recommendation book and I so move
Second.
It's moved by Ms. Keeney, second by Mr. Gillenwater.
Motion B is it appears on the bottom
of page one 60 is a finance committee recommendation book.
All set? I think enough has been said Debate on the matter.
Seeing none we'll vote on this motion B under article 26
please vote at this time.
Voting is closed.
Tell you the vote is 1 0 6 yes. Nine.
No to abstain.
Final recommendation under Article 26, Ms. Ney,
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
action on the subject matter of Article 26 Motion C
as seen on page 161 in the finance committee recommendation
book and I so move
Second.
Moved by Ms. Cheney, second by Mr. Gillenwater motion C.
Top of the page 1 61
of the findings Committee recommendation book No one
to speak further on it.
Mr. Greener to speak on the matter.
Paul ER precinct seven member of the charter
and bylaw review committee.
Just very briefly what this article or what, I'm sorry.
What this motion is asking you
to do is revise a restriction in your original vote from the
fall of 2022 when the CBRC was created.
There's no requirement in the charter
or bylaw that a member of the charter
and bylaw review committee
nor is there a requirement in statute that that person
that every member be a member, a resident of the town,
but the language of the motion at fall 22 town meeting put
that restriction in.
We've had a member who has served on prior charter
and bylaw review committees who has served
for the better part of the last two years on this current
committee who would like to be able to continue.
She's technically now off because she moved out of town.
This amendment
to your vote at fall 2022 would allow her to be considered
for reappointment by the moderator.
If we don't pass this, we're at a sixth person committee,
we have to go find a seventh person
and get them up to speed on two years worth of work.
So I would respectfully ask your support on motion C.
Thank you.
Further debate on the matter Mr. Evans.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Yep.
Okay. I just wanted to note that many
of us here at town meeting know Ms.
Berkowitz and she's been a long time
town meeting member and long time member of the charter
and bylaws review committee
and CON has contributed countless hours to this effort
and I just wanted to have it noted in
the town meeting proceedings that
that we acknowledge her service and thank her for it.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Further debate on motion C
as it appears in the book,
seeing none will vote this at this time.
Jeff, you may vote now.
You
Voting is closed.
Tell you the vote is 1 0 5. Yes. 12.
No one abstention.
We're now gonna jump to Article 29.
Article 29 is on.
You'll find the article in the motions following from page
180 6 of the FinCon book
180 3,
Excuse me,
I'll say it again.
Too many pages.
Is it two pages before
the article begins on 180 3 I think. Yes,
Correct.
Right. And Ms. Keeny for recommendation.
Mr. Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
action on the subject matter of Article 29.
Motion A as seen on page 180 4
of the finance committee recommendation book and I so move.
Second. Moved by Ms.
Cheney, second by Mr.
Gillum Water motion A as it appears on page 180 4
on the FinCon in the FinCon
book to speak to it.
Ms. Fin.
Thank you Mr. Moderator. Thank you Tom Beading.
Christine Weiman, precinct five, secretary of the Charter
and Bylaw Review Committee Motion A is written
to rescind what was passed as amendment C
in the actions taken at 2023 fall annual town meeting
to create the special act Amendment C created text
to change the current charter quorum of 91 members
to a new quorum based on the number of filled seats
of town meeting members.
This became known as the floating quorum.
It was clear to members of the CBRC
that Tom meeting wanted another opportunity
to discuss the floating quorum.
The original vote was extremely close
and had extensive debate During our spring
and summer deliberations.
The committee felt in fall 2023
that we were offering a solution to the periods
of time when finding a Quorum for town meeting is difficult.
By eliminating the unfilled seats, we felt
that this was actually an opportunity
to improve the efficiency of town meeting
during the meetings held this fast spring
and summer, the subject of the floating co quorum
was a subject that was at a number of meetings
and members of this body
and members of the public participated in the conversations.
At one point the floating quorum was called a potential
poison pill that could be used
to kill all the charter changes.
If the original amendments that were passed already went
through the legislature and came to the voters for a yes
or no vote, that there would be some individuals who
so objected to the fact
that we changed the quorum in the charter, that they would
push for the town to defeat all the other charter changes
that we think are helping to improve the efficiency of the,
the community and and the town administration.
Managing the quorum count under the floating quorum
after an annual town election requires ongoing, accurate
and timely record keeping by the clerk's office
as the number of filled seats
after the spring election could change
from session to session.
So for example, in between sessions, newly elected
or appointed members could be added
to the total town meeting filled seats.
If there were
Vacancies.
Vacancies, I know I'm looking for the word
when a caucus is held, so there are times when there are
write-ins and those write-ins have
to be accepted by the individual.
It can take time for the town clerk's office
to actually continue to complete all
of the town meeting seats.
And if there's ties there can end up being a caucus.
So from session to session,
particularly in Spring Town meeting,
you could have different numbers
of filled seats which would change the quorum
for different sessions.
You can also have resignations during town meeting as well.
And so the number of filled seats could change from session
to session and that requires accurate
and timely record keeping.
And the committee became concerned that if for any reason
that record keeping, even if unintended was inaccurate,
that it could potentially invalidate a a,
you know the votes from a session of town meeting.
For these reasons, the committee voted to put the motion
to town meeting to rescind any changes
to the Quorum If town meeting so feels that they are unhappy
with the floating quorum, you can vote positive action on
motion A if you're satisfied with the floating quorum,
then you would vote no
and we would retain the current text
that's in the special act.
Before you folks debate this,
if you look in the first line is a phrase
that says Fall 2023 annual town meeting.
I think that's supposed to read 2023 fall
annual town meeting.
That's the way it reads throughout the remainder of
the motions under this article.
That's the proper name for fall annual town meeting too.
So without objection we will make that clerical change.
The clerk will make that clerical change.
Got that Diane, see it.
You got it there. It's done.
Yeah, I didn't want you to change it.
Don't change anything until I tell you to change it. Please.
Okay. The clerk now knows and it's been
and there's been no objection.
So that's how, that's what you're gonna vote.
Now under this article,
further debate on under motion A Mr.
Grr.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Paul Grr, precinct seven
and a member of the charter and bylaw review committee.
I would actually urge your support for this motion the year
plus ago, 18 months ago.
The CVRC thought that this was a very good idea
to introduce this notion of a floating quorum.
There were, there was a lot of, you know,
it was a very close vote on amendment C last fall.
I think there were 52 people who liked the idea.
48 people who really did not like the idea on principle
based on, they felt it was unfair
to representation, et cetera.
And I'm not gonna repeat those arguments, but we heard them
and we actually worked with this
and went back and revisited matters.
We also took note of the varying state
of record keeping as clerks have come
and gone, as you will see in an upcoming article under
article I believe 27, where there's a lot of changes
to the town clerk bylaw that are proposed.
The steps that are involved in determining whether
or not a town meeting member who has not resigned
but who has left the community has in
fact left the community.
Is they, they're, they're multilayered steps.
It's not an easy, it is not an easy process.
A 91 quorum.
We maintain it and it's objectively clear.
It does not require any extra record keeping.
You either get 91 town meeting members who show up
and you can vote on stuff or you don't.
And if there, one of the things
that we thought about when we researched past town meetings,
it was many years ago, I believe 2010
where maybe it was 2009 where the warrants
for town meeting didn't comply
with this really old state statute.
That's still in effect that the paper warrant had
to be put up in every precinct around the town
and there were any number of appropriation votes
and bonding votes that we voted,
but the public was never theoretically notified
and we, all of those bonding
and actions were actually in grave jeopardy that, you know,
the bonds had already been issued
but there wasn't legal authority to have issued those bonds.
We said well we might not have that problem,
but we don't want to ever be in a position
where we think we've got a floating majority and we don't.
But we voted or we're in a position where we couldn't vote,
but we actually could have
because the record keeping is out of phase
and we just voted to allow a modification for a prior member
of town meeting and resident to join to,
to be potentially reappointed to this, to CBRC
when she moved out of town.
She ceased to be a member of town meeting
the clerk's in the middle of running the busiest
presidential election since 2020.
And filling that seat is not necessarily the priority.
So this is like we actually, we, some people objected
to this on principle grounds,
we also revisited it on practical grounds
and we would urge you to take this out.
If you take this, if you vote positively on motion A, then
that means the, there will be no change
to the proposed quorum.
It would stay at the current 91.
So I urge your positive support on motion. A
Further debate under is there something
new that's gonna be mentioned.
Mr. Ostroff?
Josh Ostroff, precinct six. Mr.
Moderator, in my debate, I want to make reference
to the portions of the C BRCs report to town meeting
regarding the size of town meeting
because it is germane to our ability to achieve a quorum,
which is fundamentally what this is about.
With your permission, I'll keep it within
That.
No, it's outta scope. You're talking about this,
that amendment only had a issue
with the quorum of town meeting.
Right? Alright. Not the size of town meeting.
That's not the appropriate time to discuss that matter.
Whether the report had it in there is immaterial, the scope
of this is what amendment C was
and amendment C modified that part of the charter only
Understood then when would it be appropriate
to make reference to the size of time meeting, which was in,
within the scope of the article,
but is obviously not within motion. A
When a motion actually has some sense
or within that is within scope of that topic.
So So
Someone has to move something,
Right,
Which you, there is an alternative motion here,
A supplemental motion that could be,
well you can take an action and then that action
and then the discussion could occur.
Sure.
My motivation for seeking to discuss the report was
to discuss the two and a half pages
and multiple exhibits that were provided by the CBRC.
Yeah, but I'm hearing you say
that there is no opportunity to
Discuss not under motion A,
But potentially motion B. Because
The only thing that's on the floor is motion
A I just want to know when we have that
Discussion.
Motion B is actually making corrections
otherwise that were triggered by, by
what is happening under motion A.
Right. So that would also be outside of the scope.
Okay. Then I just think
Of the motion only, not the article.
Yes. And just educating the body
for why I wanted the opportunity to discuss the report.
Yeah, that, well I
Rule,
I've ruled, no, not changing my ruling.
I understand then that ship is as
Simple as
That.
That ship has sailed I to this motion.
I urge Tom meeting to support it.
I think that we could look at the reason to change the,
the denominator, which is the number of TOM meeting members
who may be seated to be less than 180 as something that is
not appropriate on technical grounds.
That's fine. But I think
that there is a further more fundamental issue about that.
We would be codifying, we'd be saying it's okay
if we have under participation
in our local legislative body,
it would be okay if there were only 130,
110 whatever number.
Because we would just take 50% plus one of
that number and then that would count.
You're, you're you're talking about the size of the body,
But I'm talking about
I'm ta we're talking about 90
changing this back to what the quorum used
to be, which is 91.
Correct. But theoretically, if so, please
Speak to the, the motion that's before you,
What we voted under, it's pretty
Narrow
What we voted under amendment C in fall 2023
would allow for 50% plus one of whatever number
of Tommy D members were seated.
However low that may be.
And I think that that is un that would be
a wrong in a, there is
A point of order.
Excuse me, Mrs. Foss,
Charlene fos precinct 10.
I think this is outta scope.
There's a lot of stuff going on behind the scenes,
but for me we need to stay at 180.
No, you have to stop right there. Okay.
Just as much as he can talk about it.
You can't talk about it, but
He's talking about
It.
I don't care. I know he's talking about it.
He's being very crafty about it.
No, it's not under appropriate point of order. Mr.
Ostroff, this is about the quorum change.
That's what that amendment was.
The calculation of course was the
floating number of members.
That is true. But even under that circumstance,
there were still the same number
of town meeting member seats as there were before.
What I believe you're talking about is change the change in
the number of seats.
Two different, two different subjects.
So I'm ruling that out
of order if you can't stick to the problem.
The the what, what is in order I'm gonna ask you
to give the page the microphone.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
I urge support for motion A,
because I believe it is best for the town, best
for representative democracy
and would cure a mistake
that I believe this body made in fall 2023 when it narrowly
voted amendment C.
Thank you Mr. Moderat. Thank you sir.
Ms. Vickers on the other I couldn't recog didn't recognize
you on the other side of the bar.
Good evening. Brenley Vickers Precinct eight.
Straight to debate. I urge please vote
yes on this.
If for no other reason, then it's the right thing to do.
But also because I am the person
who put the citizen position for Article 30.
And if we vote yes now, we won't have to hear me talk later.
Thank you.
I think that's a first, first that I remember.
Very good. Any further debate under motion?
A Yes sir. Mr. Pandering.
Thank you Mr. Mardo. Pandre P six.
I have a question about the quorum
and you can tell me if this is appropriate, where the vote
end up by maintaining the floating quorum.
And we heard that the presentation says that that number
will like or may likely change from session to session.
How will the number be advertised?
Will it be published on the warrant?
Will it be stated by the moderator when,
when he opens the working of the how would that,
how would we know that number?
Our town clerk keeps a record of those.
The members that are seats, the town clerk lets me know,
Okay,
How many seats there are
or how many members there are so that we can understand,
you know, numbers and voting and everything else.
If there were a floating, it would have to be information
that would come from the clerk's office
because that's where all the records are kept to me,
to then make a determination what the, the quorum is.
Okay. And then let you folks know what
The quorum is.
Okay, so you, you'll give that announcement
that the quorum is whatever number, 84, 75, whatever
It is.
That would be my understanding of how it would work. Okay,
Thank you. Yeah,
You're welcome.
Good question. You have motion
A before you with the minor change
that was made to the text.
We'll vote that at this time.
Jeff,
please vote now.
Well you've already been voting but start the clock.
Wait a minute.
Exactly. These are all
written correctly I think.
Yes. Just that one. Typo. Talia.
The vote is 1 0 7. Yes.
11 0 0 abstain
matter passes by majority vote.
Ms. Keeny further recommendation under Article 29,
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members, the finance committee
unanimously recommends favorable action on the motion on the
subject matter of Article 29.
Motion B, also seen on page 180 4
in the finance committee recommendation book and I so move
Second.
Moved by Ms. Keeney, seconded by Mr.
Gillenwater to speak to the matter. Ms. Weand.
Thank you Mr. Moderator Tom,
meaning Christine Weisman Precinct five.
Since we just passed motion A.
Motion B is necessary
to change the yes no vote to the voters.
So as you can see in motion B, the text
down in quotes shall the town vote.
We need to, in the fact that the special act, we,
we just took action to take something out of the special act
that was put in during fall 2023 town meeting.
So we had actions in fall 2023 town meeting,
special town meeting number one in 2024
and now 2024 fall town meeting.
We have three different town meetings
where actions have been taken to impact the special act
and all three of those town meetings need
to be reflected in the yes no vote.
So the yes no question to the voters.
So what we're asking in we,
we can't actually, the special act can't be adopted
by the voters if all three town meeting
actions are not included in the question.
So what we're asking you
to do is include change the question
to include all three town meetings
because we just took action right now.
Thank you.
Further debate under the, the motion
before your motion B Mr.
Lenahan.
Thank you Mr. Moderator. My apologies ahead of time.
Mike Lenahan precinct six.
Is this actually a majority vote or two thirds? It's a,
It is a majority vote.
Okay, the other thing is in the quoted section,
it's a triviality, but since it's gotta be on a ballot
question, the in the middle line where it says Article 29
of 2024, fall annual should town be capitalized?
Yes.
Thank you.
Without objection, what?
That'll be corrected. Thank you.
Further debate on the matter.
Seeing none will vote this at this time.
Jeff, please vote.
Tell you the vote is
one 13.
Yes. Three. No, zero abstain.
Is there any other business under Article 29?
Seeing none, we're gonna move back to Article 27.
Here we go. Page 1, 6 3. Ms.
Ney, does the finance committee have a recommendation
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members?
We're talking Article 27, correct? Yes. Okay.
The finance committee recommends
unanimously recommends favorable action on the subject
matter of Article 27
as seen on page 165 in the finance committee recommendation
book and is so move
Second.
Move by Ms. Keeny, seconded by Mr.
Gillenwater to speak
to the matter motion a Ms.
Whan.
Mr. Moderator, if you
remember we had a conversation about adding some punctuation
to this motion.
Yes.
I wanted to move that we add a comma in motion, A
on page 1 25
after the word natick in the sixth line down, such
that it reads in newspaper
of general circulation in in the town of Natick.
See that D? Yep.
It has been noted without objection will be added.
Thank you. To continue Christine Weidman, precinct five.
The CBRC request that you approve motion.
A we're, what we're doing is town meeting.
We're giving the town the flexibility in emergencies
to call a special town
meeting within a shorter period of time.
Currently the select board can call a special town meeting
within 28 days
and this motion would move the minimum lead time
to the state law of 14 days.
Also included is additional language expanding the
communication channels the town can use
to communicate the call of a special town meeting.
These match the definition
of a newspaper in the proposed charter changes in the
special act, but that definition will not become active
until the Special Act legislation is passed by the voters.
With this change to calling a special town meeting, it's,
it's not mandatory that if
that the special town meeting would need
to be called in such a short period of time.
But if there's any kind of an emergency
and then town needs town meeting action,
it might even be possible
that a finance committee hearing might not take place prior
to the start of that special town meeting.
And under these circumstances, actions could be put in place
before a public, excuse me.
Under these circumstances, town meeting could seek
to waive mandatory conditions, which would include the fact
that there is a required public hearing
of the finance committee waiving a mandatory condition is
the 13th motion in the precedents of motions table,
which actually appears in your finance committee book on
page 1 66.
If that motion is made and seconded
and debate is allowed on the motion
about why the FinCon might not be able
to hear the action of town.
You know, for the call for the town meeting, if that passes
by a two thirds vote, the town meeting could proceed
and hear the details of the emergency.
That was that for the reason that the
special town meeting was called.
Essentially we're just trying to give the town a tool
to deal with an emergency in a more urgent
timeframe if it becomes necessary.
Certainly special town meetings can be called within 28
days or 36 days.
There's no requirement
that the select board use this shorter period of time,
but if there really was an urgent issue that needed to come
before the body, this change in the bylaw gives the town
flexibility to do that.
And that's what we're asking for.
Motion A is to the floor
as printed on page 1 65 for debate.
Seeing none, we will vote on
this motion at this time.
Jeff, please vote. Now.
Voting is closed.
Tally of the vote is one. 14. Yes. Four.
No one abstain.
Further recommendation, Ms. Keeny,
Mr.
Moderator in town meeting members,
the finance committee has no recommendation on the subject
matter of Article 27.
Motion B
Ms Hun.
Mr. Moderator, I move the main motion on pages 1 65 1 66
of the finance committee recommendation book
October 5th, 2024.
And I so move
Second by Mr.
Awkward.
Everybody see that as printed?
It's actually at the top of page, the text of the motion,
top of page 1 6 6 on the subject matter. Ms. Weisman.
Thank you Christine Weisman. Precinct five.
Motion B was before this body in fall 2023
and was referred back to the CBRC.
Motion. B allows Tom meeting
to consider changing the procedures
to call the question Tom.
Meeting members are familiar with Natick's unique three
person standing rule.
These three people can be staff
citizens or Tom meeting members.
Long standing Tom meeting members are familiar
with lengthy debate on issues
where debate points are reiterated multiple times
by different members of the citizens
or town meeting members who have sought to speak.
If three people remain standing, the motion
to end debate cannot be made In this motion.
The committee proposes using the procedure
of town meeting time, adding you, adding
the fact that we wanna have the discretion of the moderator
in our vision, the moderator understanding the issues
of each article and possible amendments to the motion.
We'll know if all of the amendments, motions
and positions of the proponents
and opponents have been taken care of before.
Accepting a motion to question
if town meeting does not allow for the discretion
of the moderator and then moves to town meeting time
if accepted that procedure
in town meeting time cannot be debated
and must proceed immediately to a vote,
only having the motion fail would allow debate to continue.
The red line of section
of article three section 11 is on page 1 72
of the finance committee recommendation book
Debate on the matter.
Motion B. Mr. Polyandry.
Mr. Polyandry, do you seate your time to talk?
Okay, then you have the floor.
Sir, if I call on you, you have the floor. That's
Fine.
Thank you Simon. Morning Ry prison six.
I have a question for you Mr. Moderator.
So the will this, if this were voted
and accepted, this will give the moderator
complete discretion to determine whether
everything has been discussed. Is that correct?
No. It's only half. Correct.
It's only that I allow the motion to close debate
is my, it would be the discretion of the moderator.
You folks still have to vote it.
Okay.
If you don't like my discretion
or my decision to allow the question to close debate,
you vote no and you continue on with debate.
So taf right?
I have, I as a moderator, if this passes, the moderator
would have the opportunity
or discretion to allow, you know, debate to go on
and then say that's enough.
Somebody stands up and moves the question.
I can doubt it then accept that.
But town meeting still has devoted
Okay in the debate. Straight to debate.
Very good
Sir. I mean I would argue that once the,
the motion of closing debate is taken, usually,
especially if there's no one standing, I guess it's fair
to say they would pass.
So it would be difficult, I guess to have that motion failed
if no, nobody stands.
I'm just, you know, I'm, I'm not against voting for this,
but I'm just thinking whether if three
or more people are standing up
and maybe they're willing to say something
that hasn't been said before, we don't have a chance to know
that if the motivator chooses, if this were to be passed,
the moderator chooses to close the bait.
Very good. I think Mr. Connolly was the next hand I saw
Paul, Paul Connolly in precinct six.
Mr. Moderator, this item on moving
to question is one that is extremely confusing
to many people, but I would like
to just mention a couple of things.
The moderator, as he does now,
he continues to have all of the things that you get
in Tom meeting times description, so to speak.
In other words, it's, it's almost, he can basically rule
something out of order, something like that, that's,
that this is happening and and things like that.
He still has all that particular power so to speak.
He can basically shut people off and sing like that.
So that is
what moderator is allowed to do.
They are supposed to make magic happen
during debate so that all of the information that we need
to come up and make a decision is there before us.
What we are doing by this particular thing is we
are making it possible to use the
practice by which the town meeting decides that
it's time to end the debate.
We cannot do that now
because of changes that we shall I pray the word foolishly
added to the, the motion
that we have in our bylaws.
It was foolish what we did and we couldn't get rid of it.
But this will essentially put back the particular thing that
that a normal way to do it is that
somebody will raise the move.
The question, well what does that do?
Some people think when someone moves the question they
automatically take control of the whole thing
and it has to happen.
No it doesn't.
It's basically telling the moderator when I've
received, I wanna move the question.
The moderator still has to make the decision whether
things are being done right and,
and nothing will happen to what is happening to Tommy.
For example, let's suppose that we have an A,
a motion made and one person has spoken to it
and something like that and a couple,
another person has spoken on it
and then somebody else moves the question.
Well the moderator is aware of the fact
that somebody has already told him in advance
that he planned to bring up this subject,
so to speak, an amendment to the thing.
There hasn't been a chance for him to do it.
So the moderator I would expect is gonna say
I cannot take that motion for question at this time
because there's a good sound reason why you cannot
because people have had this particular thing.
There are other types of things like that.
The moderator can stop people who are trying
to pull a fast one by, by
moving the question
after one person has spoken, the moderator will do that
and he will not put the motion for question on the floor.
The moderator has the powers that the moderator has
and now what we are doing is we are getting back the
powers that in a normal no problem cases,
we as the town meeting can stop the debate
or attempt to stop it.
That's all I had. I just wanted to emphasize
that the moderator has not been restricted from anything
that he has and can always do them.
Mr. Colburn right across the aisle.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Dirk Coburn, precinct four
and member of the finance committee.
This article was considered on September 19th when I had a
conflicting obligation
and could not attend the finance committee.
If I had been there, the finance committee would have
a positive recommendation.
Tonight I affirm
what previous speakers have said.
I also point out that I would quibble
with the moderator's response to a previous speaker.
It, it really leaves two thirds, not one half,
but two thirds of the discretion with town meeting
because the, the moderator cannot actually make the
motion to the question.
One of us has to. So there has
to be somebody here motivated to do it.
The moderator then has discretion
to engage in a process by which we can come to
the best understanding of what the needs are of our body,
which cannot be codified.
It it relies on judgment and discretion
and you have to assume people are going to approach
that in goodwill.
I urge us all to pass this. Thank you
Mr.
Greenberg.
Paul Grr, precinct seven.
Just a couple of quick additional comments.
This is designed to give the moderator a
tool to help the body.
Part of the issue with moving the question when the motion's
made and seconded, it's not debatable.
So if half, if a bunch
of people haven't been heard on one side of the question
or another and have new points to raise, you can't stand up
and say I want to vote no on move the question
because there's more to talk about.
You're not allowed to do it. It's a non debatable motion.
You go straight to a vote, you get two thirds debates cut
off, you don't get two thirds debate continues.
We have this three hands rule, the balance for moving.
The question is if you want
to hear the debate ev everybody genuinely hear
fair, all, all sides.
You don't want it move too soon
and you definitely don't want it move too late.
We've had situations where three hands have been up
for like 30 people,
20 people in the back citizens groups come in.
I think of the most recent one happened
to be the south medic dam, which I happen to like,
but we listened to some 27 people say the same thing over
and over and over again.
And because three hands were up, not only
of town meeting members but also of residents,
the moderator could not take the motion.
The what this is allowing a moderator
to do is like when it's got
how many times has a moderator stood up there
and said it encouraged us, this is getting repetitive.
Is there anything new? Right?
And there's nothing and nothing new's coming forward
but there are 12 hands that are still up.
This would give the moderator the discretion to say,
unless somebody has something new to say,
everybody else sit down, you have something new
to say stand up, we'll hear it.
Otherwise I'm gonna take the motion someone
can make the motion to question.
We're trying to give a,
you know the moderator a tool in the service
of town meeting members to fully air the debate
but not have it be protracted.
That's the balance that we're trying to trying to strike.
We actually spent a lot of time researching this,
looking at the details of town meeting time
and looking at its you know, at another body called,
you know, Robert's rules of order
we're under town meeting time.
The moderator has complete discretion on some people
objected and we went
and studied it that a moderator might be given too much
power, right?
Well we actually found in town meeting time
that the moderator already does.
There could be 30 hands up that have never spoken before
and the moderator could say I didn't see him.
I take the motion to question the moderator's the only one
who determines what's in order, it's an idea.
Now other communities outside of Massachusetts,
that's not the case or there could be one hand up
and somebody moves the question,
the moderator could say I thought I saw three.
So there's no fix
for a bad moderator except the next election.
We're trying to give a tool to a decent good mo, you know,
moderator in the service of town meeting
to get all the discussion.
But then when we had all the
discussion, bring it to a close.
So I urge your support on this. Thank you.
Further debate on the matter. Yes,
Hi Victoria Grafflin, precinct five.
I am a little bit confused now
after the last two comments actually my understanding
of this was that this
would eliminate the, the requirement
that the moderator cannot end discussion if there are still
three hands raised.
Is that correct?
No, that's incorrect.
Okay.
Our current bylaws require that I cannot
take the motion made by a town meeting member
and put it to the floor.
That is to say, to move the question or close debate.
Okay? That's what our
Right, if there are three
Hands up, if three or more people are standing right?
Right. What you're essentially going to change is that three
or more people standing goes away
and the discretion then would be on whoever the moderator is
that is regulating the debate.
And then if someone pops up as was mentioned
by a member for an example, someone pops up
and moves the question but there I know there's two more
amendments out there or I know there are three people
who are energized and have talked to me
and said I want to speak to this.
I have the discretion to not accept that motion
and to continue or you can reverse that
and to say I'm hearing as was just mentioned,
I'm hearing the same thing over and over and over again
and I'm not gonna tell you which one I like
To use.
So I think, I think that's the the,
And then I could, I could basically say
the question is appropriate even though
more than three people are standing
or no matter how many people are standing.
Yeah, I think that's, does that help?
It does and I think that is what I understood
because it's got this duality where on the one side it's
enabling more potential discussion.
I think I was presuming that if three hands were up,
those would be rep, those would represent any of
that potential more discussion.
I guess what I would say is a little bit of a concern
that if there are,
and I'm sure I will regret this comment when I get a chance
to speak on my article,
but if there are residents of the town who wanna speak
and even if they want to voice something that has been said
by others, this is the forum in which we have
that opportunity for residents to just voice their opinion
to be heard and that even if it's repetitive
and even if it requires us to stay later than we want to,
that's part of our job is to hear what people say
and give them a voice and allow them to do that.
And I think, you know, we like to assume that
of course whoever the town town moderator is doesn't play
favorites and would hear everybody out.
But there could potentially be somebody who wants
to cut off discussion, you know, prematurely for some reason
and that's just a potential out there.
So I'm not entirely sure if I, if I support this,
but I did want to say that I think it is important for
even if there are repeated opinions for
residents to be able to be heard.
Thank you.
Have we heard enough Mr. Gas
Move the question?
No one else was seeking the floor.
There's no need to take the motion to question.
We'll vote this motion now.
Motion B as it appears on the seriously on the top of page
1 66.
Jeff please vote at this time
voting is closed.
Tell you the vote is 94. Yes. 18.
No to abstain matter passes by a majority vote.
Ms. Keeny further recommendation under this article,
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee recommends favorable unanimously
recommends favorable action on the subject matter
of article 27 motion C as seen on page 1 66
of the finance committee recommendation book and I so move
Second, it's moved by Mr.
Ms Cheney, seconded by Mr. Gillenwater to speak to this Ms.
Weisman.
Thank you Mr. Moderator. Christine Weyman precinct five.
This motion is really also was a motion referred back
to the CBRC from our fall 2023 town file town meeting.
The goal of this motion is to clean up this table,
the precedents of motions
and it might be easier to see
where the errors are on the red line.
On page 1 73 there are some footnotes that need
to be corrected and so we've corrected those
and that's what's reflected in your motion.
In addition, we're asking you to change the quantum
of votes on certain motions from two thirds majority
to a straight two thirds vote.
So technically a two thirds majority
and a two thirds vote mean the same thing you know in terms
of your dictionary,
but the term two-thirds majority can create confusion.
When you think about our fin com recommendation books,
the quantum of votes is always listed as two thirds.
And so changing this table to have the quantum of votes
for these particular motions
to be two thirds is just consistent
with our current practices.
So again, if you wanna see the red line
to see the corrections, you can see that on page 1 73
of your fin com recommendation book.
So we urge, urge that you vote yes on this motion. Thank you
To speak on the matter Mr.
Sidney.
Thank you Mr. Moderator Town meeting members.
Richard Sidney precinct eight through you.
Could we get a description of
what waive mandatory conditions precedent is?
Waive mandatory conditions is what you're asking.
Yeah, I just, I not sure what it is.
Sure I don't understand it. Ms.
North to the member's question.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Town meeting members, I believe that refers
to the finance committee public hearing.
It refers back to the general bylaws article
three, section one.
So if you just give me a sec I will pull that up.
Yep. So article three section one says
that the representative town meeting may
by a two thirds vote waive any requirement in the bylaws
for a public hearing unless required by statute
or town charter on specified
or particular matters of business including within the
articles of any town meeting.
So that's what that refers to.
Thank you. To continue a a second question through you.
I was wondering if the CBRC had considered
adding a footnote to the take no action motion
to the members question Ms.
Weisman or Mr. Greer? Mr.
Awkward, Mr. Greer
Paul Grr precinct seven?
The answer was yes.
We actually had something drafted up
and we were advised by legal counsel that
what we were trying to do with it could not be done
and to leave it alone so we didn't make it.
Thank you very much. Further
debate under this motion.
Motion C. Seeing none
we'll vote this at this time.
Please vote.
Voting is closed.
Tally of the vote is 111. Yes. Three.
No zero abstain.
Further recommendation under this article Ms. Keeny,
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee has no recommendation on the subject
matter of Article 27.
Motion d
Ms.
Wyman,
Mr.
Moderator I move the main motion D on page 1 67
of the finance committee recommendation book
October 15th, 2024.
And I so move
Second by Mr.
Colburn
to speak to the matter Ms. Weisman.
Thank you Christine Weyman Precinct five.
Motion B looks to amend Article 10 section one, scope
and powers and duties of the select board bylaw
to bring it into conformance with the charter.
The red line of the changes for this are on page 1 74
of the FinCon book
and an ID it there it identifies the proper sections
of the charter that should be included in the bylaw
and it de deletes incorrect line.
The line deleted is general direction
and management of the town and that is being taken out
because it negates the roles
of other important town agencies such
as the school committee, the planning board,
the conservation commission
and town meeting who all have areas
of responsibility in the general direction
and management of the town.
Thank you. Debate on the matter.
Seeing none will vote this at this time.
Jeff,
keep voting.
And the tally is 107 yes.
Seven. No to abstain Ms.
Ney I think it's a final recommendation
under Article 27.
No second to last. Second to last right.
Mr. Moderator and town meeting members The finance
committee unanimously recommends favorable action on the
subject matter of Article 27.
Motion E as seen on page 1 67
of the finance committee recommendation book and ISO move
Second.
Moved by Ms. Ney, second by Mr. Gilmore or Ms. Weisman.
Thank you Mr. Moderator. Christine Weisman Precinct five.
Mr. Moderator is the supplement to the charter
and bylaw review committee report.
Red Line Texas Motions.
Is that available to put up on the screen?
I think I had asked that.
That the red line might be available.
Yep.
Motion E
completely replaces the bylaw Article 11 for the town clerk.
Yeah, there was also a handout
that was put at the front table when everybody came in
tonight that hopefully you picked up as well.
'cause what I wanna do is walk everybody through
all the changes that we're looking to make
and it's much easier to see that in the red line of motion.
E
Please continue
Select
sections in this bylaw.
Were rewritten between town council
and special counsel to conform with state law
and I'll reference those sections when we get to them.
And I, as I mentioned, there's a handout
of the red line motions that was on the front table
in motion E We have looked
to remove any gender references in the document.
So especially in section one, in section three,
any gender references are removed.
That's primarily the change in section one is
to remove the gender references in section two
changes the procedures for recording of deeds when town
agencies receive conveyances of land or buildings.
It's then gonna be under the new changes,
it will be the responsibility of the party
receiving the land
or building to take care of recording the change
in ownership, which then gives that new deed
to the town clerk to record in the town's records.
And then if there are any issues, the last line allows for
the town clerk to seek the assistance
of town of town council.
If there's any confusion about the conveyance
in section three, recording of town meeting proceedings
currently places the responsibility of the town report
with the select board, which is per state law
In section four notification of election or appointment
or certain resignations removals or changes.
This is one of the sections that was rewritten
by both town counsel and legal counsel.
Together appointing authorities must notify the clerk
of any volunteer appointments.
The process to then notify the individual
of the appointment is outlined
and similar procedures are followed for resignations.
This section also outlines the duties of the clerk
after town meeting dissolves.
There's a lot of new language that's added in section four
and again that's the language that was added
by the legal counsels.
Section five and seven have no changes.
Section six, notification of town meeting action.
Really this is just a formatting change
for the clerk's actions.
The removal of a subsection B is redundant and unnecessary
because the clerk bylaw must provide information
to a town agency if if requested.
Under section eight, this is another section
that was rewritten by both councils
and combines the original section eight
and section nine into one section.
So now section eight is called notice of removal
of residents or resignation of Elected Town Officer
or Town meeting officer.
And this particular section has just a number of scenarios
and what could happen if a town meeting member
or an elected town officer resigned or moved on a town
and didn't resign or somebody reports to the town clerk
that a town meeting member has moved out of town
but that person hasn't resigned.
There are all, there's just a series of actions
that the town clerk can follow procedures
to identify whether someone is still
is still a resident of the town and
therefore eligible to be either a town meeting member
or an elected town officer.
Notice of removal of residents
or resignation of elected town officer
or town meeting member.
The various scenarios where the clerk may learn
of a town meeting member
or officer being removed from the town.
And the actions the clerk can take
if they validate the information.
If the town clerk cannot validate the information such
as someone is actually moved out of town, then they have
to refer the matter to the board of registrars.
The board of registrars are the only town agency
who can determine if a resident is a voter and
therefore the town clerk has to refer the action
to the board of registrars
and then the board of registrars can get back
to the town clerk whether someone is
still a registered voter.
So again, all of this language that was added
is all due to state law and
and the legal counsels helped us to rewrite that
because section eight and nine were combined.
Section nine is deleted.
So you know you can see that in the red line Section nine is
you know that that line section nine is removed
but the text underneath
that deleted line is still part of section eight.
So section eight is is a big section.
I'll go further down. Gloria.
Oh good.
Out the other way.
Are you gonna scroll back up to,
you wanna scroll back the other direction?
Oh yeah, go the other way. Thanks.
Yeah, I didn't realize it was back up on the, on the screen.
Okay, section time,
section 10, excuse me.
The former section 10 becomes section nine
and there are no changes.
The old section 10 be the old section 11 becomes section 10
and that is then renamed the political calendar which only
has minor edits on posting the calendar to the website.
Some text has been removed because it is redundant
and required by state law.
The last two sections are renumbered with no changes.
So old section 13 becomes section 11
and old section 14 becomes section 12.
A lot of changes I know,
but we just thought it would be better to kind
of walk you through all these changes.
Thank you.
So we'll take this slowly.
That's weird.
Hmm.
There is a handout on the bottom of it.
It says one dash 10 14 20 24. That's what I'm looking at.
And we also have attempted
to put it up on the screen for you.
We'll put this motion to the floor for debate
saying none.
We'll vote this at this time.
Motion E please vote on motion. E
voting his clothes.
Talia. The vote is one 14. Yes. One no.
Two abstain. Oh, one abstain.
And now the final recommendation. Motion f ms. Ney
Mr.
Moderator in town meeting members,
the finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
action on the subject matter of Article 27.
Motion F as seen on page 170
on the finance committee recommendation book and ISO move
Second.
Move by Ms. Ney. Second by Mr.
Gillenwater motion F as it appears on page one 70
of the FinCon book Ms. Wyman.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Christine Wyman, precinct five, article 27 motion F.
There are no red lines for this
because these are two new sections
that can be found on page one 70
of the fin com recommendation book.
The current bylaw for the board
of registrars just identifies the size who appoints them
and what their term is.
And this is such an important Age town agency
that we felt that we should add in that the board
of registrars has responsibilities
that are identified in mass general law and other statutes.
And this new, this new section two identifies this
in the new section three, the powers and duties
and their actions to determine voter eligibility
for being a voter in town
or if, excuse me, an elected town officer
or town meeting member are still eligible to, to be in
that position in town.
Those are all those procedures are all detailed
in mass General law.
The board of registrars must hold public hearings
to determine if an individual is still a
registered voter in town.
If it's requested by the town clerk
or a member of the public
or in a follow up if a voter feels they have been improperly
removed from the voter rolls.
Motion is to the floor debate on the matter.
Seeing none, we'll vote this at this time
as it appears on one page one 70
please vote now.
Voting is closed.
Talia the vote is one 14. Yes. One no.
Zero abstain. Next order
of business is Article 28.
Article 28 is questions with regards
to the changing the bylaws having to do with bylaw articles.
50 51
and 55 Ms.
Keeny, does the finance committee have a recommendation
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members?
The finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
action on the subject matter of Article 28.
Motion A as seen on page 177
of the finance committee recommendation book and I so move.
Second. Moved by Ms. Keeney. Second by Mr. Gillenwater.
Motion A under article 28. Ms. Weisman.
Thank you Meeting members Mr.
Moderate Town meeting members motion A impacts bylaw Article
50 Police regulations Section one, obstruction
of public ways license required.
The red line for this motion is on page
1 51 of your book.
We are adding text
or authorized employees to the current bylaw at the request
of the police department.
This allows the police department to identify employees
who can manage obstructed public ways if their department is
the cause of an obstruction such as street
or sidewalk construction or for water
or gas, you know, water or gas line issues.
And essentially the police department is then able to say so
and so, you know, within this department can help manage the
obstruction of the public way.
It's really a service for the police department. Thank you.
Motion as to the floor motion.
A seeing no one seeking the floor for debate.
We'll vote this the motion
as it appears on page 1 77.
Jeff
please vote.
Voting's closed
tally of the vote is one 11.
Yes. Three. No, zero abstain. Ms.
Keeny further recommendation
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee recommends FA unanimously recommends
favorable action on the subject matter of article 28.
Motion B as seen on page 1 77
of the finance committee recommendation book and ISO move
Second.
Ms. Whiteman.
Thank you Mr. Moderator motions B
and C of this article both relate
to animal control section 16, the red line
for motion B is on page 180 2 of the FinCon book
motion B adds a single line in Article 50.
Section 16.7 finds
a new type of kennel.
An unlicensed commercial kennel would, would be able
to be fined with this edition.
The amount $500 is felt to be consistent with their standing
as a for-profit entity
and consistent with similar fines in
framing him and Wellesley.
This was research that the police department shared
with us in our discussions with the Chief
Chief Hicks chaired with the committee that the work
of the town's new animal control officer has been working
to identify unlicensed kennels in town.
And that this fine is being used as a deterrent such
that if an unlicensed commercial kennel is identified,
it will quickly become licensed
before the dog officer comes back for reinspection.
Or that this higher fine will be,
I will be, you know, issued.
So really, you know, kudos to the animal control officer
for working to identify
and ensure that our kennels are licensed
and if we have unlicensed commercial kennels in town,
then they will be fined at this amount
that is being proposed.
Motion to the floor. Mr. Lenahan?
Thank Thank you Mr. Bonner.
Recollec 3 6 6 I I realize the definition of a personal
personal kennel is described
by referencing mass general law.
But I guess the question is,
what is a personal kennel with 25 or more dogs?
How is that not in some manner either a commercial, in
what circumstance would a personal kennel have
more than 25 dogs?
'cause North
Thank you Mr.
Moderator. I can only refer you to the definition
which is a packer collection of more than four dogs.
That's the definition under the general laws
that we're referring to as a personal kennel.
Could, could I Mr. I continue something about four dogs?
I missed that. I I apologize.
You wanna repeat that please?
Would I, would I like to repeat it? Yes.
Would you
Please? Yes, certainly.
I wasn't sure A personal kennel under the general
laws is a pack
or collection of more than four dogs, three months older
or older owned or kept under a single, single ownership
for private personal use.
And then it's longer than that
but that's, it's, it references four dogs.
I'm not sure where 25 dogs comes from.
Okay.
Mr. Lenahan,
That, that, that answers my question.
I assume if somebody was running the hounds then they might
have 25 hounds.
So you're entering into debate.
Thank you. That's it.
Very good.
Further debate under this article.
Somebody seeking the floor seeking? I think not. Okay.
We'll vote this at this time.
Motion B spans two pages.
1 77, 1 78 please vote now
voting is closed.
Tally of the vote is one 13. Yes. Three. No, zero abstain.
Moving on to further recommendation Ms. Ney,
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
action on the subject matter of article 28.
Motion C as seen on page 1 78 1 79
of the finance committee recommendation book. And I so move
Second Ms.
Weiman. It was moved by Ms. Ney, seconded by Mr.
Gil. Ms. Weisman.
So again this motion is related
to animal control section 16
and what we're doing is looking to add a new category
to section 16 dash a eight confinement.
And the new line during the course
of a dangerous dog hearing would allow an officer
may order an animal to be muzzled
or confined to the owner's premises is if it is the subject
of a dangerous dis dog hearing.
So essentially there's all these other categories
where an officer might require an animal
to be muzzled or confined.
And certainly if there's, if the dog is the subject
of a dangerous dog hearing, it makes sense that
that animal be restrained to the property.
So it's literally just in addition to the current
six circumstances where an officer may take these actions.
Debate on the motion before you. Motion C.
Seeing none, we'll vote this at this time.
Please vote.
Tell you the vote is
1 0 5.
Yes. Three. No zero Abstain.
Ms. Ney Further recommendation
Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
action on the subject matter of article 28.
Motion D as seen on page 1 79 in the finance
committee recommendation book. And I So move.
Second Move by ms. Seconded by Mr. Gillenwater.
Ms. Wyman.
Thank you Mr. Moderator. Christine Wyman, precinct five.
Motion D updates Article 50, section 16
point 11 definitions pet.
And this motion adds three definitions
for three different types
of kennels defined within mass general law.
Again, the chief was looking to have a definition
for commercial kennels, personal kennels
and domestic charitable kennels or, or shelters.
And these definitions are all linked
to their counterpart under mass general law such
that if mass general law changed the definition
of the kennels, we wouldn't have to update the bylaw.
Thank you. Debate on the matter.
Seeing none will vote this at this time. Please vote now.
Thank you.
Voting is closed.
The tally of the vote is one 14. Yes.
One vote no. Zero. Abstain.
Ms. Keeny further recommendation.
Hi again. Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
action on the subject matter of article 28.
Motion E as seen on page 1 79 and 180
and is in the finance committee recommendation book If you
haven't heard an is, so move.
Second. Move by Ms. Keeney, seconded by Mr. Killen water.
If you focus on the first line, there's a,
there's a misspelled word.
Subsection is not spelled with a C.
It's spelled with an S-S-U-B-S.
So that word should read
subsection Ms.
Weisman.
Thank you. Say that again. Accept, accept the change.
Okay, thank you. Christine Weisman, precinct five.
Motion E updates Article 50,
section 16.15 dog license and kennel fees.
Currently this section has fees for various types
of dog kennels as defined by the number of dogs housed.
The police chief is requesting new language to add
a license fee for commercial kennels
previously defined in a, in a, the bylaw that we just voted.
And also have a, a requirement
for a domestic charitable kennel to be licensed
but have no, no fee connected to that.
So again we're adding commercial kennel
and the license fees requested at $250
and a domestic charitable kennel needs to be licensed.
But there is no fee
Motion e to the floor.
No, no one will look for debate.
We'll Mr. DeLuca
The moderator question.
Microphone please. Alright, name and precinct.
Thank you Mr Moderator.
Jeffrey DeLuca precinct six through the moderator.
I just have a question on this
to clarify a previous question.
We were told personal kennel was four dogs
or is it four dogs or more?
To clarify? Four or more but no limit.
I'm trying to determine two, the difference between
personal kennel and commercial kennel.
'cause if I see here 25
or more dogs as a personal kennel, I don't know where
that line would be for commercial
To the member's.
Question Ms. North.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
The, the basic distinction
between the definitions is not the amount of dogs
but it's the use to which those dogs are put.
So commercial breeder kennel is
and commercial kennel
or it's where they are engaged in businesses of some sort
breeding training or such
personal kennels under the definition
do not, they may breed for their personal use
but they don't breed to sell.
They don't sell trade barter
or distribute the dogs that they breed
and they do not
te house temporarily.
Dogs that aren't there. So they can't also take on.
So that's the, those are the main distinctions.
Okay, thank you. So took Mrca clarify one more time.
So it depends on ownership of the dogs.
In a personal case, the person
who owns the property owns the dogs.
In a commercial case they own it
but it could be on a temporary basis
or it could be someone else's dogs
that they are housing temp for a period of time.
It depends on the use they make of the dogs.
Okay. Alright. Thank you. Yep. No further questions.
No further debate. Certainly
Debate on the matter.
Seeing none, we'll vote this at this time.
Please vote now.
Voting is closed.
Tally of the vote is one 14. Yes.
1 0 0 or one abstain.
That concludes the business. No, we got one more.
Yeah, I was trying. Darn it.
Ms. Kinney final recommendation right
For this article.
Okay, Mr.
Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee unanimously recommends favorable
action on the subject matter of article 28.
Motion F on page 180
and the finance committee recommendation book and I so move
Second.
Move by Ms. Keeney. Second by Mr.
Gillenwater motion F on page 180
of the finance committee recommendation book Ms.
Ween.
Thank you Mr. Moderator Town meeting.
This is our last motion for the charter
and bylaw review committee for fall 2024 town meeting.
And this motion amends the definition
of the term police chief in the bylaw article
51 of alarm systems.
And the chief we're doing this to support the chief.
The red line of this can be found on page 180
of the finance committee book.
The motion expands the term police chief to allow the chief
to designate individuals to select responsibilities
as he sees fit.
So as he explained to us in our discussions with him,
you know the chief has many responsibilities
and there could be responsibilities related
to different departments.
And so he might be able to designate a department head
to be able to handle that
or he might be able to designate one of his officers
to be responsible.
So in, in allowing, in changing this definition
to allow the chief to have a designee,
we're giving the chief the ability to manage the town
and efficiently manage his time.
Thank you. Debate on the matter.
Seeing none, we'll vote this at this time.
Please vote at this time.
Tally of the vote. One 12.
Yes. One no. One abstain.
Skipping over Article 29, we'll move
to article 30.
It's on page one 90.
Does the finance committee have a recommendation
under article 30?
Mr. Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee recommends no action on the subject
matter of article 30 as seen on page one 90 and I So move
Second.
Seeing no one to speak seek a positive motion.
I'll accept the motion for no action as a motion
before you to speak to the matter.
Ms. Vickers on the other side of the rail.
Brinley Vickers precinct eight.
We already took care of this. Thank you.
No further debate on the matter.
We will vote this at this time.
Please vote now.
Putting is closed.
The vote is 100. Yes. Six.
No five abstain. Next order.
The business is actually article 32.
Page 1 94.
Question with regards to restrict gas powered leaf blowers.
Citizen petition.
Ms. Keeny recommendation.
Mr. Moderator and town meeting members,
the finance committee has no recommendation on the subject
matter of Article 32.
Ms. North Graves, for what purpose do you seek the floor?
Nancy North Graves Precinct six.
I move that the town vote to refer the subject matter
of Article 32.
Back to the sponsor, the select board
and the Board of Health.
Second by Ms. Ciara. Patty
is there someone that wants to speak to this matter?
We usually have the presenter
or the citizen petition sponsor speak first
and then we'll get to the motion.
I'll accept that as the main motion. Ms.
Gaffen, do you wanna speak to it from that position
or do you want the podium?
It's up to you
and there is a presentation.
Got it. How much time do you think you'll expend
at this point?
Hopefully just 10 minutes.
Objection is an objection. Our our limit is five minutes.
Okay. The sponsor is asking for more than that.
I was unaware of five minutes given other
presentations. It's
Rule that we voted the first night.
Sorry, I forgot.
Yeah,
Five minutes is fine.
We'll give you as much time as reasonable
and I'll wash the clock to keep it as close to that.
Is that okay? You grant me the discretion?
Yes. Thank you. I heard yes you had the floor. Ms G,
Thank you.
Thank you town meeting members for your time
and consideration of this proposal.
And Mr. Moderator next slide.
I'm not gonna repeat what's written in your town meeting
book page 1 94.
So if you could just advance the slide again.
Again, there are some definitions.
I just wanna stop here for a moment.
So for people who may not know what this is,
this is a gradual transition away from gas powered
or internal combustion engine leaf blowers.
What it's proposing is that starting in January, 2025,
that gas powered leaf blowers only be able to be used
during spring and fall cleanup periods, not
during the summer for example.
And that after two years in January, 2027, the use
of gas powered leaf blowers would be banned
with the following ex exemptions on properties
above 1.5 acres.
And during a time of emergency,
most residential properties in Natick are
quarter or half acre.
Just for reference. Okay, keep going.
There would be some enforcement that's similar
to other types of enforcement of similar bylaws in Natick.
As you can see, the first offense would just be a written
warning and then eventually
after a third offense it would go up to $250
for a person, an individual,
or $500
for a commercial prop landscaper for example.
Okay, keep going. So this is really
the most important thing.
Why would we be proposing this at this time?
And when I say we, I mean not just me,
but Eco Natick is, is the sponsor as well.
The people of Natick have a right to the quiet enjoyment
of their homes without the unwanted intrusion
of unnecessary health risks
from neighboring properties and contractors.
Air and noise pollution from gas powered lawn equipment,
especially leaf blowers, creates unacceptable health risks
to people, plants, and animals.
The desire for hyper manicured landscapes should not
outweigh the actual undocumented health risks created
by the use of gas powered leaf blowers.
So that's really the big why. Next slide.
So why now? What has changed?
So certain things have changed over the years.
The use of commercial landscaping services on, you know,
quarter acre residential properties is something
that's evolved over the past couple of decades.
This was not the case 20 or 30 years ago.
Along with that, we have leaf blowers being used sort
of year round, not just during leaf blowing season.
There's a lot of new data.
There was a report put out by US PERG last year at this time
that really documented just how bad
and how polluting these gas powered leaf blowers are.
And then there's been increasing recognition by residents
of the constant and unacceptable levels of both noise
and air pollution that's caused in particular by
the gas powered leaf blowers.
And we also have reasonable alternatives.
Now this has been documented for example, in a study
by consumer reports within the past year that really
very comprehensively compared gas powered
and electric slash battery operated leaf blowers.
Okay, next slide. So just how bad is it?
You can see that one of the main differences is that most
of the gas powered leaf blowers are two stroke engines,
which are very inefficient.
They combine the burning of gas and oil
and they produce a lot of particulates.
Particulates are not seen normally in cars anymore
because we have things like catalytic converters
and they cause a lot of really bad health problems.
You can see some of the data up there.
It's very well researched data. I won't read it all.
Keep going. And noise pollution.
This is what most people think about is the noise pollution.
Believe it or not, this is a hazard to your health.
It's a hazard to all of the plants and animals as well.
But it's well documented just
how noisy gas powered leaf blowers are,
even from quite a distance.
Okay, next. So I was really shocked when I
found out just how bad these are,
but Middlesex County is actually the third most polluting
county in terms of lawn and leaf equip, or not lawn
and leaf, sorry, garden and lawn equipment.
And you can see the bottom when you talk about particulate
matter less than 2.5 microns, it's equivalent
to almost 1.4 million cars.
And that's just in Middlesex County.
And that was just in 2020. Okay, next.
And then there are lots of trends on this right now.
As you can see, many, many municipalities,
including most recently the city of Baltimore, has
restricted the use of gas powered leaf blowers.
I've quoted Dan Mabe from the American Green Zone Alliance.
He was a landscaper
and he realized just how destructive some
of the practices were
and some of the equipment,
especially the gas powered leaf blowers were.
And he started this organization,
the American Green Zone Alliance,
to help communities transition away from the really
destructive equipment and practices.
There are at least 10 municipalities in Massachusetts
who have taken some form of action on this.
Some have older laws, some are brand new.
And just going into effect.
And then also, again referring to consumer reports,
current electric
and battery powered leaf blowers are actually affordable.
They really are practical.
There's less maintenance required
and they are significantly required
and don't directly emit a plume
of pollution into your neighborhood
that's affecting your health.
You are think that may be, you have really broached the
six minute mark.
So if you can wrap it up, I'd greatly appreciate it.
And I think that's what the members intended.
I think there's just one more slide here.
These are some references
and as you can see there is, in fact there are Senate bills
that have passed the ways and means committee
and a house bill to provide some economic assistance for
landscapers or others who might need it. So that's it.
Thank you. Okay,
before we go any further, I want to frame
what we're gonna do here
and actually let you know about a ruling that I,
that I made earlier this afternoon.
If you go to page 1 94, 1 95
of the finance committee recommendation book,
there's a motion that's printed in there.
I have ruled that motion out of order.
And here's why. If you read the text of the article,
which is printed above nowhere in the
text of that article, does it warn you and the residents
and the taxpayers
and the interested parties in this town
that you're gonna change a bylaw?
Nowhere does it warn them. That's what an article does.
Absent that this motion that's printed in the book
is out of scope, is beyond the scope of the article
as it was presented and printed in the warrant.
So therefore, this positive motion cannot be moved
or I will not allow it to go to the floor.
Something, whatever positive motion
or any alternative motion to the, the referral
must be within the four corners of the verbiage
that's in and the intent of the verbiage.
That's in Article 32 to print it in your book.
So you can't amend any bylaws.
That's, is that clear? Yes. Okay. Made that clear.
So we only have the one motion on the floor,
the referral motion.
I'd like to see everybody that wants to speak to this so
that I can get a sense of
how many people are gonna speak to this
Point of order.
Mr. DeLuca, for a point of order
To your comment because the motion is outta scope.
Jeff DeLuca precinct six.
Does that also mean indefinite postponement is
not a viable motion?
No postponement is available. Just not there.
So all you're doing is postponing the inevitable,
just the dealing with the whole article.
You're moving the whole consideration to some other time.
Thank you.
Okay, so who's gonna, who's planning on speaking to this?
I want to get a sense. I have Ms.
North grave and, and I did have you Mr. DeLuca.
We have down front
Motion
The referral motion
that's on the floor, right?
It's the only motion we have right now.
All right, now, well, I'll get to you folks out back.
Devereux, that's your name.
Now Mr.
Pandre
down here, I saw a few hands.
I wanted to speak to the referral motion.
Anybody now on the next level
wanna speak to the referral motion?
Now you folks up back, I, you're mostly residents up there
and I knew, I had a feeling most all
of you would want to speak to this.
So I wanna try and coordinate this as best.
I'm sorry, your name?
Michael Trinidad.
Trinidad, Okay.
Are there any spokespersons, are there any people
that are primary speakers
that can speak in without repeating the same
thing, same message?
'cause I have a sneaking suspicion you all have
very similar message.
Can you designate three
or four speakers that can deliver your message?
And I'd be more than happy to call on you.
And if, if for some reason
that the message you have something new to add
to those speakers, I'd be happy to call on you.
But I want to try and economize time here
rather than hear the same message over
and over again with all respect to you folks.
So think about that. I know there's about 15 hands up there
that I can call on.
All right, I have six speakers written down so far.
So I'll start with Ms. North Grape.
She made the motion to refer Nancy,
the floor is yours.
Nancy, north Grays precinct. Six to you. Mr. Moderate.
I have a question first regarding the referral motion
and the indefinite postponement
In depth and a postponement.
Was it, what was,
I thought I heard postponement
Said indefinite
Postponement.
Oh, indefinite postponement. Okay. That I misheard.
That is in order at the,
that is in in order at this time. Yes. Your question.
The question is, if we vote no on the
referral, do we have the, the opportunity to vote on the
indefinite postponement or is it the
Other one?
I haven't accepted a motion for IP yet.
Indefinite postponement.
Alright, in that case, in debate, this is my support for
the referral of the subject matter to the select board,
the Board of Health and back to the sponsor.
As the moderator had spoke,
had mentioned the emotion itself is outta
scope with the article.
This article was not properly vetted.
So no feedback was solicited from town administration
Input was not sought from local businesses,
particularly our natick based
landscaping businesses, nor the public.
And the language of the article has not been
reviewed by town council. Thank you.
Okay, I'm gonna call on you Mr. DeLuca. Next. I apologize.
I I misheard what you had to say.
You asked the question about indefinite postponement,
not postponement.
So I answered as,
as though you said postponement. You have the floor, sir
Jeff DeLuca precinct six.
I will try and speak a little louder and clear. I apologize.
I do wanna make the motion for
indefinite postponement. Sorry,
Second it seconded by,
was that you Handy Luke, Mr.
Luke? Mr.
DeLuca, you have the floor.
Thank you. I did have some questions
to ask if this was a positive mo If there was a positive
motion, but there isn't.
I will draw attention under this.
There's under section 25.5 A, it states that the town
of Natick can include other gas powered landscaping lawn
care equipment with this ban.
So it doesn't give the authority as to
who makes that determination.
Just that the town of Natick can.
The other thing I'll, I'll, I'll touch on a few things.
First off, when you're looking at change
in terms of anything,
you can do it a couple different ways, right?
So if you truly want change to be a more
green society with the Natick, you can do it
through innovation or dictation.
This is dictation. That is not something that I want
to be a commu, you know, in my community I would rather
see innovation.
So along those lines, I talked with a lot of my
neighbors, I received a lot of emails,
I received phone calls.
It seems that every communication that I've had with members
of precinct six with other towns members has been
to defeat this motion in terms of noise.
'cause that came up as an issue.
Facts are important and I I wanna
draw attention to a couple facts.
Electric leaf blowers are not quiet.
I own two of them and a gas one.
I can tell you they're all loud.
Now I, to put more factual statements along those lines,
I did a quick search 'cause I I was curious.
Bat battery powered ego LB 6 5 0 4.
Blower tested at 92 decimals,
while the most largest powerful steel blower
that you can wear, A backpack blower, a br 800,
tested at 78 decimals.
So the electric
or battery powered blower in this case is
louder than the gas blower.
So then it comes down to,
is this essentially government overreach?
In my opinion, yes. You should not be able
to dictate personal property personally.
Mr. DeLuca, hold for a point of order. Mr. Gath.
Thank you.
I had like to ask you, Mr. Moderator, if
what this discussion that's being presented has to do
with indefinite postponement
and has to do with referral. Thank you.
It's indefinitely postponing
or referring the subject matter of this article.
And this discussion is about the gas leaf blowers
and other related topics to it.
So if it, so long
as you don't fray into other worlds into electric,
'cause this doesn't even mention electric
or battery powered.
So stay away from that.
I want you to focus on just the subject matter,
the text of the article.
Very well. The subject matter
and text of the article not only impacts Natick residents
that own this current equipment,
but also impacts commercial companies
that service Natick residents,
therefore also impacting Natick residents
through increased costs or refusal of services.
And I'm sure that there are plenty others
here who wanna speak to that.
So along those lines, I, I think I'll end my debate.
Thank you Mr. DeLuca. Tian. Mr.
Tien, I think you're next on my list.
Down front please.
Thank you, Mr. Moderator. Ian alum, precinct nine.
I wanted to rise in support of referral
of, of this, of this article.
I think that we just heard the net zero report
and how we need to move away from gas powered equipment
and vehicles and we need to move towards electrification.
So I think referral would be the proper avenue to do that so
that the sponsor could confer with the departments
and with the public
and develop a working path forward. Thank you.
Mr. Devereaux, would you hand the microphone to Mr.
Devereaux, please? Thank you. Yes.
Edward Devereaux, precinct eight.
I rise in favor of the motion.
I commend the member who presented it for doing something
that others have tried to do and haven't gotten it here.
It belongs here. I believe I,
I have a question through you, Mr.
Moderator for the speaker, and that is other towns that
Have done this.
She listed some number, like 200 across the nation.
I'm just wondering if she could briefly explain
how it's going when they start this process with,
you know, sort of a couple of months in the fall
and a couple months of spring for leaves.
Is that working? What do we know about that?
Can anybody answer the progress of another community
who has passed something like this?
I meant to ask through you to the speaker. Yeah, you,
You asked me, but I'll direct it to somebody
that can answer it directly to the question.
Ms. Gaffen? Yes, sure.
Could you get a microphone
to her please? Just to the question.
The question is how is it going in the other
2D in other communities? Right.
It varies. There are some municipalities in Massachusetts
that have had restrictions on all kinds of leaf blowers,
not just gas powered leaf blowers for many years.
Cambridge comes to mind.
They're revising that now
to specify gas powered leaf blowers a little bit.
There are other communities that have voted to
restrict the use of gas powered leaf blowers
where it's just in its implementing phase.
There are other communities such as Arlington,
where this has already gone into effect.
All these bylaws are a little bit different.
I have been researching them
and I have been reaching out to people in those communities
to find out how they're going.
So some of the communities say it's, you know,
it's a little bit of a process.
There's still people who just won't comply,
for example, in Arlington.
But I'll also note that there are major cities such
as Washington, DC and again the city of Baltimore doing it.
Thank you. That's all I need to continue. Mr.
Devereux, you gave up the microphone. Don't do that. Yep.
'cause you give it up. You're
done. Okay. You have the floor.
Sir. My apologies. Just in debate quickly,
I think the reason to start this process, as difficult
as it is on some, both residents who own these devices
and also on landscapers who we need,
I think if this process isn't started
and work through, I think it's gonna face us sooner
or later anyway.
Is my guess. And that's why I think it,
it's already late to start this.
I think it's, this is the time to start it.
So I retire my debate.
I had Ms. Napole injury next.
Excuse me.
Thank you Mr. Ros
Precinct.
Six. I raised in favor of the referral motion
and I, you know, invite my fellow town meeting members
to defeat the, in the post movement.
Previous speakers spoke about the, one of the requirements,
one of the needs is innovation.
Innovation is already there. It's happening.
We heard actually from town, you know, net zero
and definitely innovation is not one.
It's going in the direction of gas.
And so we're moving away in several ways, you know,
heat pumps and other in other things.
So I think that we, we have the capacity,
we have the people in in town to look into this
and eventually whatever is done will come
before this body anyway to be voted so we can look into this
and see if it's feasible.
So I vote, I will vote for referral. Thank you.
Down front Mr. Trinidad, you're next.
Mike Trinidad precinct three.
Just a couple of quick questions for clarification.
As far as this extending to other items,
gas powered lawnmowers was mentioned here.
I'm assuming that they would extend
to gas powered snowblowers.
Is that where this is gonna go?
No, that's the lawn equipment. Not
Under this article.
Not under this article, no. Okay.
Also, the question is as far as equivalence
of electric leaf blowers to gas powered leaf blowers,
I know personally I put out 90 something bags
of leaves a year and it's a small quarter AC allot.
I don't have a 1.5 acre lot.
So are there electric devices, backpacks,
that are capable of doing that kind of work right now?
I dunno, that's a question.
No, you don't shout anything out
or I have to ask you to leave.
Can anybody answer the member's question?
Can one of the professionals in the
back answer the question?
Gentleman with a hat on with a black,
is that a black sweatshirt?
Can you answer that question? Wait for a microphone.
And what you need, what we need is your
name and your address.
We'll get the mic to you to the member's question.
My name is Tyler DeLuca.
To answer the question, simply put no
Thank you.
To continue questions, just, just in debate that I think,
you know, having some properties exempt
and other properties not exempt is a
little, it's not universal.
I mean you should lead by example.
If it's gonna be something everybody's gonna be accounted
for or nobody's gonna be accounted for, I think it's unfair
to make some people exceptions.
I do recognize the
two stroke engine being more
polluting than the four stroke engine.
So I, I realize that I personally have a four stroke
backpack for the same reason
that it was quieter and less polluting.
But still, I have a lot of leaves to do in the yard
and the only way to do it is with gas powered.
At this point in time, I've
tried electric, it just doesn't work. But thank you.
Very good sir. Mr. Cressman, David,
David cre, David Cressman, precinct 10.
I rise in support of referral.
We can put our heads in the sand if we want
and say, yeah, gas is, that's the way to go.
It's gonna be like that. It's too difficult to transition.
You know, people said that about cars. Well guess what?
We've got some pretty efficient electric cars
and just like most things that need innovation,
there is definitely resistance to change.
Now this is not someone saying this is an overnight change
and this is exactly how it's going to be.
But I applaud the effort to start the process
and I say, let's refer this.
Let's let them do the research.
Obviously the article was not written well,
the motion not written well, but they can come back.
And this could be a multi-year process
where we make incremental strides to an end goal of just
what we heard earlier tonight, getting to more
of an electric society, less polluting society.
And I know personally on a small scale, I've used
backpack ba, I have a backpack gas
one leaf blower and I've used my daughter's electric one.
The electric one is 10 times as powerful.
It's not loud, but that's not the point.
The point I'm trying to make is let's refer it,
let's let the people do their work,
bring back more information to us
so we can move this process forward because it's inevitable.
That's where we're going as a society.
And we might as well just get
on board and start the process.
Thank you very much.
Okay, now I'm gonna go to our folks in the back,
the professionals I think that are here.
And I'd like to hear from first the business people.
I see one person rising, don't you?
If you can come down to the rail, it speak there easier
for the, yeah, you go, I need your name
and address please.
And if you, if you own a company or pur
or whatever, you can certainly say that too. Okay.
I'm Russell Gates. I'm owner of Lighthouse Landscape.
Thank you. A lot of information it gets gets thrown around
about this subject.
So I took the liberty of letting the average person know
what a two cycle backpack weighs.
It's 20 pounds, the newest battery
operated backpack that we have on the market,
which is the still BGA 300
right here looks space, age
and largely
and efficient at its job.
When the infant stages of the skies, the infant stages
of this, the BGA 300
is $2,560
for the backpack, for one battery for the charger.
You want another battery That's another 1500 bucks
the battery I have.
Excuse me. Yes sir.
There's a point of order from the floor. Mr. Krentzman
To you, Mr.
Mr. Moderator, are we discussing equipment
or are we discussing referral?
You're discussing leaf blowers, which is kind
of following under this,
this referral I'm giving a little deference to, to the folks
that aren't normally here that wish to speak.
Okay. Because I think it, it it, I I have no,
this is an nominally and I'm allowing him to, to go a little
beyond the wall, the four four walls of what we usually do.
As I was going to mention to 'em that we want to stick to
what the action is under the article
and it's an appropriate point of order.
But I'm ta giving residents and taxpayers
and interested parties little deference
because I think you should also hear,
I think we should hear everything everybody has to say, sir,
you have the floor for another couple minutes.
Okay, that's great. I think that in the other
information that is pertinent here, when we talk about the
electric future of the still BGA three hundreds,
their, their claim to fame is that they can run 140 minutes
on level one, which is a couple
of leaves across your patio.
You'd be able to blow that off in
a relatively short period of time.
Well, when we're talking about taking leaves from a backyard
and bringing them to a front yard, even with tarps,
we run into piles that are three feet tall.
Level one isn't gonna do it. We're gonna be at level three.
Level three is gonna last a whopping 61 minutes for
that one $1,500 battery.
Now it's dead. So now we gotta put a generator in the nose
of our trailers, which can echo off the trailer
and the tailgate and now be louder
than the blower we're using.
Do you see the problem? We're using gas to power electrical.
It goes to Tesla. Tesla gas stations, excuse me,
charging stations use diesel generators four
and a half gallons to charge your Tesla from dead
to get 350 miles.
Fuel is being used.
The natural gas powers our grid.
The grid powers these batteries. You can't get away from it.
It's a cycle that we need. I agree.
We need to start the debate and that's where we are.
We're starting the debate. We've got a long ways to go here.
These products are at least eight
to 12 years away from being anything
that's gonna be close to what we have.
Our existing backpacks that we use right now,
the 8,500 Red Maxs is our pop most popular.
They blow 1000 cubic feet per minute.
The newest one that came out this year is a 9,000.
Does 1,250 cubic feet per minute. That's a lot of air.
This backpack right here,
536 per minute.
You come around the corner of a house
and you got a three foot pile. Which one do you want?
I'm gonna ask you to conclude your remarks.
You're encroaching on five minutes. Okay.
Thank you. I would encourage everyone in this room to
get, get your information correct
like I did here this evening.
Not just say that something not, not to be critical
of anyone, but just to, not to say that
electrical's better gas is worse.
Imagine using your computer, have it crash nine times a day
and then at the end of that day you have to throw it out
and use your typewriter.
'cause that's where we are. That's
what we're being asked to do.
Okay. So someone else up the top
that was raising their hands.
Now we all heard what the previous speaker said.
We want to try. No, we don't. We do not applaud.
We do not do that. We all heard what he said.
The thing is we don't want repeat what he has just said.
If you have some something new you'd like to add
to the debate, please do.
Gentlemen in the gray sweater, you have your hand up,
you wanna speak
name and street please?
Hi, Justin samr, owner of Johnny Bonsai Landscaping.
Okay,
I'd like to touch base a little bit on
what he said, but also to the fact
that if these things cost this much
and where does it end with, you know,
where if they're gonna try to stop
homeowners and businesses.
What about municipalities?
I mean that in that impacts all of us,
all our taxes, everything.
So if everything costs. So where does that go? Yep.
Thank you. One more. Anyone else?
Fellow to his right? Black.
I think it's a black sweater with jacket.
No.
Oh, you're on his right, aren't you?
Name and in street please. Yep.
Eric Kaplan Th Hemlock Drive.
Been a resident in Natick for 34 years
and I've owned my landscaping company here in Natick
for 40 years.
Change is happening.
I understand that for us as landscapers,
the technology is not there.
It just isn't ready yet for us to move to electric.
The batteries only last an hour, an hour and a half.
We can't run a business and do multiple houses in a day.
Homeowners can use those electric blowers
and get their house done.
If they don't finish their house, they can charge it
for an hour and then go back and do it.
We cannot, we would have to have multiple batteries
and it just doesn't last.
I work in a few other towns that have some of these bands
and we can get maybe a half a day out
of a battery at the most in the summertime.
So technology's getting there,
but it's just not there yet to be able to
even in two years get to all electric. Thank
You.
Thank you sir.
We'll move back to the floor. Sir, the green chart.
Don Branson precinct date. Mr.
Moderator, could you please explain the difference
between a referral motion
and an indefinite postponement, please?
Yeah, we like to say
that referral motions are a polite way to say no
or referral motion is saying here
you in this case the select board, the board
of health and the sponsor.
Put your heads together and report and do something.
Okay. It's not being ordered to report back or anything.
That's a referral. An indefinite postponement is a flat out,
no, that's basically saying no,
take the the subject matter and get it outta here.
Does that give you an indication of what,
what the two are like in, in plain words?
How's that Mr. Coffee? Are you seeking the floor?
Is someone else seeking the floor over here? David?
Coffee precinct two asked to move the question. Second.
Second
As a move the question a second by Mr.
Sidney. Is that why your hands up?
I only saw one person standing. I I saw two.
Have you? Well, you have, you haven't debated yet. Ms.
G Gren. So there's two people standing.
I can take the motion to move the question.
We will vote that at this time it requires two thirds of you
to vote in the affirmative to stop debate.
And then we will immediately vote on the referral.
And then if referral fails, indefinite postponement.
Who second Sidney did? Yeah.
Please vote on the motion to close debate at this time,
the tally of the
vote is 93.
Yes. 15, no
zero abstain debate is closed.
We'll now vote on the referral motion.
And as a reminder, this is,
you would be referring the subject matter of Article 32
to the select board, the board of health and the sponsor.
I queue that up.
Jeff, please vote on that.
At this time,
voting is closed.
Tally of the vote is 79. Yes. 27.
No one abstain.
This matter is referred to the select board
and the Board of Health and the sponsor.
We'll move on to the next order of business,
which is Article 31.
Does a finance committee have a recommendation
under Article 31?
Mr. Moderator, town meeting members?
The finance committee recommends referral to the sponsor,
select board, school committee
and board of health on the subject matter of Article 31
as seen on page 191 on the finance committee recommendation
book, and I assume move
Second.
It's moved by Ms. Keeney, seconded by Mr.
Gillum water motion to refer
the subject matter of Article 31 to the sponsor
of the select board, the school committee
and the Board of Health to speak to the
matter point of order.
Mr. Linehan hand microphone.
Sir, could we have a quorum count?
What did you
Say? Could we have a quorum count?
You question the, the motion is, is I'm not gonna accept
that 'cause it's really not done right.
'cause we still have one after this. The
Motion is question the quorum.
Is that what you're trying to do?
Question is,
Seriously. Okay, we got two
Articles.
Okay. Yeah, one's gonna be very long. Okay, I'll skip it.
Okay.
We have
article 31.
It's been referral motion. Is there a positive motion?
I don't see a positive motion.
I'll accept the Mr. Devereux. Yeah.
For what purpose do you seek the floor
Through you, Mr.
Moderated? To move the motion on page 1 91 in the
FinCon book to see if the town will vote
to adopt a moratorium on the construction
or installation of any synthetic artificial turf
on athletic playing fields owned by the town
for three year time period.
Starting on January 1st, 2025,
ending on January 1st, 2028.
Seconded by Ms. Gaffen,
we have two motions on the floor.
One is to refer, the other one is, is a positive may motion.
We'll deal with them concurrently.
There is a presentation
that's been been developed under this article.
We'll take that presentation at this time.
Thank you Mr. Moderator,
Don't you begin.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.
And thank you everyone, members
and others for hearing this presentation.
First off, who we are on this slide?
Advance the slide please. She's getting there.
Just continue. Just Okay. Please continue. Let's, all right.
Hold things up. Yep.
My employment life has been entirely in the athletic
and fitness world as a first,
as a tennis teaching professional
and later as a JV high school coach, a racket
and health club manager and a management employee
of the National Trade Association
of Commercial Athletic and Health Clubs.
My brethren will appear
and I'll introduce him At the time,
sports services are interesting to me,
but I didn't know anything about artificial turf until,
along with my colleagues,
Lum Town meeting member and Dr.
Roger Luckman, who is here tonight with us Natick resident.
We started looking into them.
Those we had a chance to talk
to about our various concerns as we developed them.
Were interested. We met formally with the Board of Health,
the select board, and FinCon of course.
We met with Claire Rundel, our conservation agent,
and we talked and heard from rep representatives
of school committee and look forward to,
to furthering those conversations with them.
We hope the kind of concerns we present here tonight are
as much interest to this body on behalf
of the wider community and our children.
Next slide. I don't think we're getting slides.
It's, we're, we're getting it. We're having
a technical problem.
That's alright. Just can please continue.
I'll continue, I'll continue.
What prompted our taking this now?
Last spring, members funded here as part of this,
members funded a design study
for improving a JV field at Needham High School.
The field is overused and in poor shape.
Everyone wants to get more playable days
and hours out of that field.
So artificial turf is a natural consideration.
Natick already has three artificial turf fields.
Kennedy Brown's, the most recent Kohl Center has one.
The Natick High School has of course, Memorial Field
inside the track for you to see the, the next slide.
It would be an aerial view of memorial field
with the JV field beside it.
And just beside that, you would have a,
a wetlands down about a 20 foot ravine on the,
on the other side of a thin band of trees.
That's where it is. For those of you
who don't know what artificial turf components are,
just how they look.
That is, which I didn't, all I knew was that it had,
you know, plastic, you know, fiber plastic blades.
But inside these, these blades is,
is a what's called an infill to cushion the plastic blades
and make it playable.
This infill is usually has been made of recycled tire rubber
known as crumb rubber.
Because if you look near a
artificial turf field with crumb rubber as coal has,
for instance, and now in its age, it's,
it's nine years old now.
You will see, as you walk up the pavement to it,
you'll see under your feet tiny grains of
crumb rubber black, like, almost like black sand,
but a little bigger at greater cost sand.
And some processed organics can be used as infill as well.
And this was done at, at the new
artificial turf field at the Kennedy Brown Middle School.
Other layers of the product include additional padding,
drainage, and a backing of latex and polypropylene.
Altogether. On a football field, there is as much
as 200 tons of fossil fuel byproducts.
After its eight to 10 year life, most
of these field components will end up in a landfill at
considerable extra cost to the town.
Rationale for moratorium on new
artificial turf installations.
This is to allow a process not to foreclose
a product choice.
That product choice will remain with the town
and the school committee to propose to this body.
But the moratorium provides the time needed
to thoroughly assess health
and environmental risks that you'll hear about from Dr.
Luckman In two seconds.
To review chemical testing for PFAS
and toxins, which is currently not available accurately
for the, for the industry to consider mitigation strategies
and new product innovations in the turf industry.
And to explore the benefits
and costs of alternatives,
including improving grass field performance
with organic care, which some Massachusetts towns have had
some success with.
It's not gonna equal in terms of days and
and hours right now and artificial turf field.
I want to turn this over with your permission, Mr.
Moderator, to Dr. Roger Luckman. MPH.
So you've concluded your presentation.
I you're part of the presentation.
Thank you.
Alright, Dr. Luckman, you have the floor for five minutes.
Okay. While, while we have this slide up here,
just quickly take a look.
We have the blades on the top plastic, the infill,
which often is crumb rubber, and then sand in that.
Then backing, and then we have some foundation.
Can we have the next slide, please? Next.
Next. Okay.
So my, my job here is to talk to you a little bit about the
potential and documented harms to the health of children
and, and adults and also the harms to our environment.
And to do that fairly quickly, we're gonna start
with the blades and the
problems that we have with the blades.
They are plastic, but they also are coated with PFAS
because they use A-P-F-A-S based lubricant in order
to create the blades.
The, the good news about this is that there is,
the industry is trying to respond
and I think potentially down the road, they,
we hear possibly by 2026,
they might have A-P-F-A-S free product.
PFAS as you know, this forever chemical,
it's actually a group of about a thousand chemicals known
to have significant health effects.
The EPA is really looking to reduce the amount in, into, in,
in our water to a a zero
because it's a, a, a potent substance
that accumulates in the body.
Next slide please. Just a list of the effects
that EPA is concerned about in terms of PFAS.
So, PFAS exposure is an issue, maybe it can be dealt with.
Next slide please. The next possible exposure from the
blades is to microplastic these blade blades break down.
They, they are moved off of the field.
Up to 8% of them every, every year are shed.
And some of that may occur on the field.
We don't actually really know whether
or not these microplastics are left on the field
where an individual could potentially
ingest them or inhale them.
So there, part of what we're talking about today is a number
of questions that require additional effort, additional work
and study to determine the, the severity
and the seriousness of the problem.
You can see that we all have microplastic everywhere in our
body and we're learning
a a lot more recently about
potential serious health effects.
We have them in all these organs
and there are some potential health effects yet
to be studied, yet to be defined.
How serious, how often? We don't know.
We need some time to learn more. Next slide please.
This is a crumb rubber we're talking about.
Next slide please. Lots of bad stuff in crumb rubber.
You can see that on the right, fortunately in,
in low concentrations.
And we're just beginning to learn to what extent people
and kids who play on this might ingest, inhale or
otherwise get this stuff into their body.
So far, the studies
that have been done don't suggest it's happening
at an extreme rate, but the studies are limited.
Once again, I think if we want a definitive answer,
we need, we need more time.
There are alternative infills available.
The, the concern about them is that they may
or may not be free of other toxic substances
and they should be tested before we use them.
Next slide, please. Another problem is, is heat.
When you have a bunch of plastic laid out in the hot sun,
it heats up fair fairly quickly
to some very high temperatures.
One study here in particular, comparing natural turf
to artificial turf,
40 degrees higher throughout the day when the average
temperature is only temperature is only 80 degrees at the
hottest time of the day, 70 degrees higher than natural turf
up to a high temperature of 157 degrees.
Next slide please. Next slide.
You can see that that's well
above the temperature at which some,
it could get a third degree bird
with 30 seconds contact to that turf.
The other problem is with the radiant heat
and the heating of the air above the turf, there's potential
for kids who are playing on there to heat up and, and,
and suffer from, from heat stress.
Don't know as much about that,
but the, our our health department fortunately is trying
to deal with this by monitoring these fields,
making sure folks aren't using them when the
temperatures are extremely high.
But it does reduce the number
of playable hours when you have to take that kind of care.
Next slide please. Environmental
impacts are also very significant.
We'll just talk about plastics in initially.
The, the one, one fact that that stood out
to me is a study off the course of the, the coast
of Barcelona where they found that
of all the plastic junk in the ocean,
15% is coming from artificial turf.
So this, this stuff is running off
of the fields into streams, lakes
and in into our oceans as microplastic
and as also some of the larger fibers you see here.
The problem is it causes harm to marine life.
Fish ingests the microplastic
and it ends up on our plates more microplastic
for us to fill our organs.
There's also problem with waste management.
The, there's an eight to 10 year lifespan.
We have tons of stuff we have to get rid of every eight
to 10 years to date that I don't see any scalable way
to fully recycle everything.
So most of the time these days ends up in landfills.
And then there's a potential
for a heat island effect as well.
Next slide. Climate impacts
lifecycle about 190 metric tons at least
are released from artificial turf over its 10 year lifespan.
Also, recently, some evidence that methane is produced
by the breakdown of the blades on the fields methane's a
very potent greenhouse gas.
Next slide. Lots of
organizations out there, folks,
but perhaps more expert than I am on this
recommend against the installation of artificial turf.
This is the Mount Sinai Children's Environmental Health
Center for reasons that we've talked about.
Next slide please. And their rationale.
Similar to what I've laid out here, there's uncertainty,
there's risk of injury that we know about and,
and there's environmental damage that we,
we know is happening and does happen for sure.
Next slide. And e even in Massachusetts,
we have folks who've looked into this
and we think what the town
of Arlington has done may be a model for what we should do.
They, they formed a study committee over the course
of several months or perhaps a year.
They studied this in depth
and came up with these recommendations,
which I think are very reasonable ones
for our town to adopt.
Let's not use chrome rubber.
Just too much bad stuff in there.
We don't know enough about it.
We should make sure we get PFAS free artificial turf
and maybe that will be possible in the future.
And we need to apply those heat standards we talked about
and try to avoid placing turf in areas
where there may already be heat islands.
And finally, we want to do something about recycling.
And you can see Charles River Watershed also opposes this.
Wayland has a moratorium.
Other folks are working on organic natural gr grass as,
as an option, a safe option that, that I,
we think ought to be explored.
Next slide. Okay.
And I think 10, you're gonna step up here.
Well, yeah.
Lum you on
The floor. You are in debate at this moment.
Okay, thank you Mr. Moderator. Lum Precinct nine.
And a co-sponsor.
I'll, I'm gonna go over cost and then wrap it up.
I know it's late. So cost for artificial turf are two
to three times higher than than natural grass.
And in the Arlington study we see that it's about two
to three times more expensive.
In the cherry study we see it's about two times more
expensive and the cherry study was done in 2016.
So the numbers are lower.
So some of the reasons why
this higher cost are the initial capital cost
of the artificial turf.
And just as a note, these cost
analyses don't include interest on these capital costs.
And also it has to be replaced every eight to 10 years
and the disposal or recycling is expensive.
Next slide please. As we can see
in 2015 when we did coal, it was 1.2 million for that field.
When we redid memorial field in the high school,
it was $600,000.
We've paid in the last three years $40,000 in interest on
that loan.
'cause we didn't, we didn't have $600,000 laying around.
Medway recently voted down in artificial turf field
because of the high cost.
Next slide. So in conclusion, if you see,
look at bullets one
and two, you can see there are serious health concerns.
And as a parent of a, a child who went
through the Natick public schools, I would've liked to know,
have known these health risks.
And if I had a young child now given
what Mount Sinai has recommended
that they recommended against artificial turf,
I wouldn't want my young child out on these fields.
But that's just, that's just me there.
Other parents can have different opinions,
but I think we need to have
parents be educated to have the information so
that they can make an educated decision for their children.
If you look at bullets four
and five, you can see that there serious
environmental concerns.
And if we chose an a natural grass field
that was organically managed, that would be,
that would give us the least impact in terms of CO2.
And these as, as Roger was talking about,
these fields give off an incredible amount of plastic.
We in Natick regulate plastic bags
because we're concerned about their
effect on the environment.
These fields give off the equivalent of 10,000
to 180,000 plastic bags per year.
And then we, I talk briefly about the financial
disadvantages of our artificial turf.
So in conclusion, the moratorium would allow the community
time to further consider risks
and develop guidelines
for choosing field surfaces in the future.
Thank you.
We will put both motions to the floor for debate. Mr.
Alderson?
Thank you Mr. Moderator. Jeff Alderson, precinct nine.
Question. Would the positive motion as written
affect any change on policy of the select board,
school board or school committee
or the town with respect to purchasing, procurement
or contracting related to artificial turf?
You'd have to, does someone from the
select board want to answer that?
We'll get the legal opinion in a moment.
Could you repeat the question
As written?
Does the positive motion have any impact on policy decisions
for the school, board, school, the school committee,
select board or the town?
In terms of procurement, contracting or purchasing?
No.
Does Ms.
Ms nor, oh, who was the others school committee,
is there someone that wants to respond to that?
Ms. McDonough, you want to hand the microphone over to No,
I think you're good.
I,
Ms.
North, do you want to give us a legal opinion
on that question please?
Thank you Mr. Moderator, from a legal perspective, the,
the positive main motion does not have any legal import.
It would only be advisory to the school committee
who have control over their facilities.
To continue
Thank you.
In debate, I actually am in favor of referral, partly
to allow the sponsor to propose either a study committee
or other follow-up action, whether it be policy
or get, get agreement with the school committee to come up
with some sort of policy action
that would govern future purchases
or to come back with the appropriate notice
of a bylaw change for the town meeting
in the spring. Thank you
Mr. Greer.
Thank you Mr. Moderator. Paul Greer precinct seven.
A quick question for you. The scope
of the positive main motion is a moratorium to limit
construction or installation of these types of turf fields.
Does the scope of that moratorium non-binding and advisory?
Advisory and non-binding as it is, does that affect
maintenance of existing fields
or is it just construction and installation?
Construction and installation. That's it.
The, you
Said you said scope, right?
Use the word scope. The scope of the motion as written.
You, you, you use scope of that motion? Yes.
So I'm responding to it. Yes. Thank
You.
Don't look to the council for that answer,
Mr.
I thought you were, that's why I did. So no question.
Disagrees.
No. So the next question
that I have very briefly is
the, do we have any turf fields
that we are going to have an immediate town meeting on,
constructing or installing any in the near future
To the member of the school committee?
Start with you. The answer to you.
You're shaking your head no. Correct answer is no.
Any public fields like coalfield The answer yes or no
In the immediate future? No
Thank you
Mr.
Minor in debate. I really move referral on this.
So hope we we can get through this.
It's a, you know, this moratorium has no real binding
of, you know, effect.
If these things, these things
do probably need to get studied.
I remember my children coming home
and their shoes were filled with all
that black little powder as well as their uniforms
and their hair and ev everything else.
But if this stuff is dangerous, the, I believe the Board
of Health has the power to actually shut it down
on an emergency basis.
If they thought it was an immediate threat,
we should remember that it is the board of Health,
not town meeting by bylaw
or charter that eliminated plastic bags.
Board of Health did it through a health regulation.
They could, they have, I believe, authority over this.
And if we really want to limit future construction
and future installation of turf fields,
when the motion comes up, we could specify in the motion
that this however many a hundred thousand dollars is
for a natural field,
we can just restrict it in the appropriation
and not have to deal with this moratorium.
So I don't think
that we should do anything other than refer this
because concerns
and uncertainties, merit study, not a, you know, a,
a moratorium, particularly when we're not doing anything
and we're not affecting existing,
we're not doing anything new in the foreseeable future.
And this wouldn't affect maintenance even if it had teeth.
Thank you.
I saw Ms. McKenzie's hand.
Dear you Mr. Moderator, I have a question.
Is there any current legislation in Massachusetts
or elsewhere on the subject of artificial turf
MS North?
I don't know the answer to that question.
Anyone know the answer to that question?
Nope. He has to stand up.
Just because he has his hand up doesn't mean that I'm
recognizing him as an understood, as an official
or someone that knows it cont to continue.
Okay. I was hoping for an answer to that question,
but in lieu of that answer, I rise in support
of the main motion and of a moratorium.
And I know it has no force. It's only forces advisory.
But I don't think that town meetings should give up its
moral persuasion and it would be a firmer push
to examine the alternatives.
And I have a lot of confidence in the school committee
and the building process and I think
that the Kennedy project is much better
and second choice would be referral.
But I have a strong preference to send a message
about a moratorium on this
because I think the health of our children is first
and it can't be compromised.
This isn't saying no forever to turf fields.
It's saying let's take the time
and let's give a push to the people looking at this
to take seriously the health concerns
of our children and our community.
And the fields don't just belong to the schools, they belong
to the entire community.
They belong to the town.
And the conservation commission also will probably be part
of this because in the discussion for the money that was,
we approved for the design that abut wetlands
and there may be a stream behind it.
So it isn't just the schools, it's the whole town.
So please, I urge you
to strongly consider the moratorium. Thank you.
I had missed a coffee. No, you're gonna pass.
Alright Ms. Gaffin,
Thank you.
I just wanted to make a comment in support
of the main motion.
And it was my recollection
that at springtown meeting there was a budget item referring
to this, to the design specifically
for an artificial turf field.
And that's why this came up.
So I, I think there is some relevant potential future
motion on this,
but I'll also say
that my son played on artificial turf fields
and the kids hate it.
It's hot. I really don't see why anyone would wanna expose
their kids to third degree burns potentially.
And in terms of playable time, if you have a 90 degree day
but the field is gonna be 150 degrees on its surface,
I would presume that that reduces your playable time.
So frankly I think a moratorium is extremely appropriate
even if it's just advisory.
The questions raised by all of this
and there was one study,
I don't think it made it into the presentation that showed
that kids playing in these fields had PFAS on their bodies,
like on the surface of their bodies.
To me, you know, you could study it forever.
That's pretty bad though, from what we know about PFAS.
So those are just my comment. Thank you.
Pass the microphone to the fellow with a red shirt,
Some Dominic Hall precinct.
Eight few questions through you Mr. Moderator.
I understand that it'd be only advisor if
for the school committee at least that's
what I heard being clarified.
Cole is not school committee.
Is that, does that mean if it's a non-school committee,
pro school committee controlled property,
would this moratorium have any standing
To the members Question.
Ms. North.
Yep. Hold on.
The motion just refers to
athletic playing fields owned by the town.
They're not limited to school committee.
I don't think that was answers my question. Mr. Monterey
Does this, if this were advisory, would this refer
to cold school?
I'm sorry. Which is not a town which is not a school.
The coal recreation center.
Yes, that's that was my point. The yes. Okay.
The language of the motion is broader than just
school facilities.
Right? Okay. It's town so
It's advisory, it's the entire town but
It would also only be advisory
to the select board as well.
Thank you. So it's only advisory to to the select board.
Another question through you Mr.
Moderator, when we allocate, I've been a member
of town meeting, we've allocated funds
for these things repeatedly.
Is this the kind of expenditure that usually you would have
to ask for separately rather than put in
a generalized school budget?
Which I'll be frank,
I never actually read 'cause it's so long.
Like is it such a big number that you wouldn't,
you always have to ask for it separately
To the members' question.
Mr. Erickson, you wanna respond to that?
Sure. Thank you Mr. Moderator.
Synthetic tur fields are at a cost
of order magnitude typically in the 1.5 to $2 million range.
Either the funding source can range, most recent ones
for the town have been part of the capital program.
Not in an individual department budget,
but there could be grant funds
or other dollars that might be outside
of the town's appropriation
that could also go towards such fields
To continue.
Sure. In debate, I'm sort of bummed
that this is only advisory sometimes I wish these things
were clear before I got to the these meetings
'cause I was kind of excited to vote for this.
I think that the environmental public health
and economic arguments are pretty persuasive
and it would be kind of exciting
to me if we actually moved away from artificial turf.
We just like poured a bunch
of money into our water filtration systems.
It seems kind of crazy to me that we're not excited.
You know, like we we're gonna filter our water, spend a lot
of money doing that and then we're just gonna build lots
of plastic fields like, I don't know, seems counterintuitive
to me, but,
'cause this is only advisory I'd sort of,
I guess I would support the referral even though
that sounds like you know, the soft no thing.
Which is also always kind of a bummer.
Like maybe we're just not
gonna do anything about that either.
So mostly I don't even know what I'm saying
'cause it's just like sort of sad
and I really sort of wish that, you know, if we didn't have
to, you know, these things, these exercises in futility
for things that people get excited about
or kind of a super bummer
and I wish we would sort of maybe in advance, you know,
manage expectations a little bit more.
Thanks
Gentleman in the green shirt.
Don Branson precinct date question to the proponents
of this, I believe it posted up there
that the surface temperature could get over 150 degrees
on the playing field and that could burn children.
But if I understood it, it also said
that the air temperature was 117 degrees.
And if that's the case,
when was the last time Natick had air temperature
of 117 degrees?
Do the members question, did the board of health measure
the field temperature as well
as the ambient air te temperature?
I'm gonna direct that to the board of health director
Through you.
Mr. Moderator, Michael Boudreaux
and Natick Board of Health Director.
We started some preliminary readings for temperatures.
It wasn't exactly the most scientific way of doing it.
We have recently acquired some equipment
that will provide us with more accurate readings.
Okay, so we don't know if it's a,
the air temperature in Natick's ever been 117 degrees.
I mean, is the daytime not
your bank clock or something like that?
Alright, that's your second
question to the members' question
To the member.
Thank you Mr. Moderator. Not to my recollection, no
Thank you.
To continue
In debate, I'm for, for all of this.
I have a daughter who plays club and town soccer.
She spends about nine hours a week on fields.
She loves playing on the turf fields.
She finds 'em so much more comfortable to run on
and she doesn't get twisted ankles from all the ruts
and all the dirt patches
and other things from the grass field
that don't get irrigation.
They don't get water.
And so as that picture showed earlier, it's a dirt patch.
And so we send the kids out.
Most of the time they're running around on dirt. Thank you
Mr.
Grady. Allen, Grady Precinct three.
I asked to move the question
Second.
I saw only two people seeking the floor there was seconded
by Mr.
Sidney. At the time that the motion was made,
there were two people seeking the floor.
Alright? Okay. Okay. Then the, I'll call on the two people.
I saw Mr. DeLuca,
I see people standing
and sitting on the backs of their chairs.
People that are raising their hands. You gotta stand up.
That's the rule. Mr. DeLuca, you are the floor
Three.
Mr. Moderator, really quick question.
Does the moratorium impact any grant funding requests
To the four studies?
Wait a minute. Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa,
whoa. What was the question?
Does if the moratorium goes through,
would it impact any grant funding requests
To the members'?
Question?
Not
That I'm aware of. No
School.
Thank you very much.
School went to weigh in on that
school wasn't listening.
Okay. If the moratorium were passed, would it affect any
of the grants that may be filed? No. Okay.
That's it. Thank you.
Very good.
Mr. Evans, I saw you, you were on your passing.
So you were one of the two, three people that were standing.
Mr. Lenahan,
Thank you by Claudia.
Three. Six. Six On page 1 92.
The first paragraph in the report
of the September 10th finance committee meeting
six weeks ago, members asked
regarding the EXP sponsors interactions
with the various town agencies, boards, et cetera.
They had not happened.
My question is,
have the proponents had any meetings with town officers in
that six week period
To the member's Question.
Mr. Devereaux? Thank
You Mr.
Moderator. Yes, we have, we met, we were on the agenda
with the board of health, with the select board
and we've had con well, a representative
of the school committee was at that meeting and spoke.
We've had, I've had personally other conversations
with school committee members
and we look forward to working with 'em.
I think the question's been answered. Thank miss,
Thank you.
In, in a debate, the the moratorium is not required
or useful for conversations having to do with this issue.
This if, if it is as bad as it is made out to be
the turf, the turf,
the existing turf field should be close tomorrow.
If it's not as bad,
the moratorium won't buy us anything. Thank you
Ms. Rich.
Just a, a question on, on how to stand up
and and raise a point.
I did stand up but someone else was
speaking so I sat back down.
Do we need to stand the entire time? If we're trying
To speak, some people do,
But,
but are you requiring it please?
Some people, some people do.
And if I see them and I write down people's names and,
and try and record them as best I possibly can.
But the rule as was read, read in the first meeting.
If, if you want to be recognized,
you must rise from your seat.
There are some people who I know who can't do that.
And they've already told me that. So
My question is, I did rise.
Someone else took the, the mic. So I sat
Down.
I didn't, maybe I didn't see you
Perhaps so do I need
to in future stand the entire time? Yes.
Continue standing. Okay. That's the only way a moderator's
gonna know that you even continued to seek the floor.
I actually saw a member who I called on no,
just a few minutes ago
and that member said, nope, they passed.
I understand. So
That was part of my list of the
skin scratchings
That were on.
So am I allowed to speak at this time?
I'm sorry.
Am I allowed
to speak at this time? You have the
Floor.
Okay. Thank you. You're welcome. Through you Mr.
Moderator, if the main motion,
the sponsor's motion passes, is there any,
anything that would prohibit the sponsors from coming back
with a motion that's properly composed so
that it would have effect and wouldn't be just advisory.
So long as they had an article that framed
what they wanted to do in
that motion was within that article? Yes.
That, that's all I have to say. Thank you. Yes,
Certainly
Move the question.
I don't see anyone else seeking the floor.
We will vote on this matter at this time.
The first, so motion we will vote on is referral.
And the referral is to the select board,
the school committee and the board of health,
the sponsor in the board of health.
Please vote at this time.
Tally of the vote is 58. Yes.
31. No, the matter, the referral passes
by a majority vote.
Final order of business'. Article 20 have
Order,
Excuse me. Rise
For appointment. No quorum.
You are raising the question to question the forum.
You look in town meeting time. That's what it says.
That is where I was. Okay, so you move
to question the quorum.
Everybody must sit town meeting members if they want
to get counted, they must stay in the hall.
'cause I need to count heads.
I'll get to that. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Got 51. I
Got 51.
3 54
On the, on
The lower on all the town meeting
members in the upper level.
Please stand up.
All right.
1, 2, 3, 4, 1.
I got 29. What's that?
All right.
We have 83 town meeting members here.
We don't have a quorum.
We'll come back here Thursday night for the single article.
Article 20.